[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My subject for today is data journalism and the political economy.
[Amit Varma]: Well, actually, I thought of doing a show just on data journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And the first guest I thought of inviting is actually also an expert in the political
[Amit Varma]: economy with incredible insights on contemporary politics.
[Amit Varma]: So it made sense to weave that into the show as well.
[Amit Varma]: Roshan Kishore is data and political economy editor at the Hindustan Times.
[Amit Varma]: And beyond this, he also used to be a student politician himself in JNU, an experience which
[Amit Varma]: as you will see, adds an added layer to his journalistic insights.
[Amit Varma]: This conversation was recorded on July 30.
[Amit Varma]: And before we cut to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audio book platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audio books that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds
[Amit Varma]: in local languages like Hindi and Marathi and unlimited monthly subscription costs only
[Amit Varma]: rupees two ninety nine per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30 day free trial if you hop on over to storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly, so as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to recommend one book a week that I love.
[Amit Varma]: The book I want to recommend today is a classic that if you haven't read already, listen to
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams.
[Amit Varma]: It's on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, you get a 30 day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Roshan, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Roshan, I invited you, of course, because of your really interesting data journalism
[Amit Varma]: and your writing on politics and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But after inviting you, I found out that when you were a student, you were also into politics
[Amit Varma]: yourself and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that, not just the political aspect of it, but you know,
[Amit Varma]: what kind of person were you when you were young?
[Amit Varma]: What interested you?
[Amit Varma]: You know, where did you study?
[Guest]: What did you study?
[Guest]: Basically, I'm from Bihar and I, you know, which is the normal thing, at least it was
[Guest]: in our generation then that you had to qualify the IITG and all that.
[Guest]: And I studied sciences for my plus two and I was really very bad at it.
[Guest]: But luckily, I took economics as a subject because you had to take a fifth subject, computer
[Guest]: economics, and I thought I enjoyed it.
[Guest]: So after I made a disaster of my plus two stint, I decided to come and pursue economics
[Guest]: in Delhi University.
[Guest]: And even then, I'd never given a lot of thought to it.
[Guest]: I think as things evolved, I also and more than that, my teachers, a couple of whom happened
[Guest]: to be from JNU, realized that, you know, looking at the qualitative economic picture was something,
[Guest]: you know, I had an aptitude and encouraged me to take the JNU entrance exam.
[Guest]: And no, I got through and no, as you know, the JNU economics course is radically different
[Guest]: compared to what the other premier institutions in this country like Delhi School or IGA do.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that the former is good or the latter is bad, but it is a more heterodox
[Guest]: sort of a thing.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about how it's different.
[Guest]: The crux of it, I think is, you know, a lot of people say that, you know, it's no more
[Guest]: Marxian etc.
[Guest]: But I think JNU, I don't know what it is now.
[Guest]: But I think the basic focus was they somehow, you know, emphasize the Kaleski-Keynes framework
[Guest]: and classical political economy was sort of emphasized upon.
[Guest]: So rather than, you know, you start running econometrics and regression equations, etc.
[Guest]: from day one, and you essentially go the job market way because a lot of analysts, you
[Guest]: should remember that that was the boom period then before the crisis, you know, when I went
[Guest]: to university and corporate jobs were really, I mean, coming at a very fast pace.
[Guest]: So rather than just do that, I mean, JNU does that also a lot of people from JNU have excelled
[Guest]: in those kinds of fields, it also allowed you to the opportunity to look at classical
[Guest]: political economy.
[Guest]: So we had courses like political economy of development, where you would see, you know,
[Guest]: what kind of trajectory China take, the Korean-Japanese war, those sorts of things, the feudalism
[Guest]: capitalism debate.
[Guest]: I'm not that I remember all of those today.
[Guest]: But it allowed you to, I mean, try and look at the larger economic pictures, if I could
[Guest]: say and it also allowed me to sort of develop my own arguments, you know, we were not very
[Guest]: good at it when we were young students, but at least try and get the larger picture develop
[Guest]: arguments question basic assumptions behind arguments which are being made.
[Guest]: A lot of comparative studies, you know, I joined my MA in economics in 2004.
[Guest]: This was just a couple of years after the East Asian crisis had hit.
[Guest]: And no three, four years before the larger global crisis hit.
[Guest]: So those are very interesting times to be in the discipline, you know, even then there
[Guest]: was a lot of charm for the corporate world and you know, mainstream economic theory,
[Guest]: but it was an interesting period.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, because ours was a department which had very eminent left leaning
[Guest]: economists like Professor Prabhat Patnayak, Utsav Patnayak, Jyoti Ghosh.
[Guest]: So they influenced a lot of our, to a very large degree, our worldview as well.
[Guest]: And then, you know, because JNU is JNU, politics also happened.
[Guest]: And you know, the economics department is always, it has historically been a stronghold
[Guest]: of the SFI, so to say, the left leaning students, people like Sitaram, etc. are alumni.
[Guest]: So it was a mix of the two.
[Guest]: So the academic and the political sort of came together.
[Guest]: That's the ideological aspect of it.
[Guest]: But I also believe, you know, that I've been out of my home after my class 10th.
[Guest]: So plus two, I did in different city where there were no hostels.
[Guest]: So basically at a very young age, I was, we were friends running a flat, a kitchen, etc.
[Guest]: And life is very difficult when you do that.
[Guest]: So JNU was the first time I actually went to a hostel and life in JNU is as convenient
[Guest]: as you can get for a student.
[Guest]: Now that I look back at it, I also think that, you know, one can be critical that it does
[Guest]: not make you do enough hard work, unless you are sort of self driven and motivated, you
[Guest]: will get along easily in JNU, this is something I also did.
[Guest]: But that also played an important part in shaping my worldview, because the left was
[Guest]: a strong force in the union there and the history of student struggles, etc. in JNU.
[Guest]: Today, all of it is looked down upon, unfortunately.
[Guest]: But that was the second, I think, but also an essential aspect of it.
[Amit Varma]: And was there a moment during all this or a phase during all this where it struck you
[Amit Varma]: that economics is not just something in a book, it's not just a theoretical subject,
[Amit Varma]: but it explains your world and it explains your world so viscerally that then it is a
[Amit Varma]: natural step for you to want to get involved in politics, for example, and you know, all
[Amit Varma]: of it becomes one congruous whole.
[Guest]: That I believe has always been true.
[Guest]: It's, it's, it's not for me to say, you know, for example, no great economic catastrophes,
[Guest]: something like the Great Depression, I mean, I mean, it could not be arrested in time because
[Guest]: people believed in the Say's law, you know, that supply will create its own demand, and
[Guest]: therefore, there's no need to.
[Guest]: Now, we know that Keynes had sort of, you know, pointed out those mistakes with the
[Guest]: basic theoretical framework earlier, but it took a Second World War, it took a, you know,
[Guest]: Soviet camp to sort of put that extra pressure to start that corrective mechanism after you
[Guest]: know, the Second World War ended, the golden age of capitalism has been no aid, even if
[Guest]: we look at, you know, for example, today, there's a lot of discussion about why India
[Guest]: couldn't embark on that manufacturing success story like the Aryan Station countries, even
[Guest]: China later, now, a lot of development economics today, even mainstream economies, I think
[Guest]: the role of the fact that, you know, egalitarian land distribution was done even in these countries,
[Guest]: you know, which after the Second World War went to the sort of the capitalist block,
[Guest]: but you know, breaking up land monopoly played a crucial role in those things.
[Guest]: So that way, definitely, if you look at the text, also, I think this ample evidence to
[Guest]: suggest that economics plays a role and politics plays a role in determining the economic trajectory
[Guest]: of societies, nations, etc.
[Guest]: That's one.
[Guest]: Now, let us come back to JNU again, now, JNU is a place where you pay even today, I think
[Guest]: a few hundred rupees in fees.
[Guest]: So it actually allows you to, you know, pursue things which you like without, you know, feeling,
[Guest]: I would say burdened by the fact that you probably have to get out of the university
[Guest]: and pay lakhs of rupees in student loans.
[Guest]: So, you know, I do not exactly come from a very poor family, but you know, most middle
[Guest]: class Indians, you know, like my socio economic background, could not have afforded this kind
[Guest]: of study if they had to pay, say, student loans.
[Guest]: So those kind of intellectual choices, which I was able to make earlier in my life, and
[Guest]: know of which the professional reward I'm reaping today, you know, without, you know,
[Guest]: having to have ever paid for that, you know, subsidised education, which I received, I
[Guest]: think in a country like India, it still makes a lot of sense to at least have, you know,
[Guest]: if not all some higher educational institutions, which allow people to do that, because if
[Guest]: you if breaking even becomes the sole point of education, and this need not know just
[Guest]: confine itself to economics, any other discipline, I think you'd end up with a very different
[Amit Varma]: intellectual trajectory in any country or society.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I had I had coffee yesterday with a friend who's studying right now in JNU.
[Amit Varma]: He's doing his postgraduate economics, shout out to Sanjit.
[Amit Varma]: And he and the tuition fees are still pretty much as low.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, he says he pays more for his hostel and for his tuition fees.
[Amit Varma]: And that also sounded like a really small amount to me.
[Amit Varma]: So what was politics like, like, you know, today, I think of you as one of the sharpest
[Amit Varma]: minds in political journalism and in covering the political economy and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fascinating to me that you were also at one point a politician yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Is there any sort of correlation between politics on a bigger scale and the kind of politics
[Amit Varma]: on the smaller scale?
[Amit Varma]: And what was politics on that smaller scale really like?
[Guest]: I think it makes a lot of difference, you know, because I was never an active participant
[Guest]: in it.
[Guest]: But I've seen politics in Delhi University, now Delhi University, for example, I was looking
[Guest]: at the papers yesterday, so some 70,000 students have taken admission in BA first year.
[Guest]: So if you look at it, when the DUSU elections happen, you're probably talking about an electorate,
[Amit Varma]: which is more than 2 lakh strong.
[Guest]: We're recording on July 30, by the way, yeah, so you can't have any intellectual engagement
[Guest]: with that kind of crowd.
[Guest]: It is, you know, physically, humanly impossible to even know, think of doing it.
[Guest]: Now, compared to this, JNU is the exact opposite.
[Guest]: When we were students, we had around 4000 students.
[Guest]: So politics essentially was a lot of room to room campaigns, going to students having,
[Guest]: you know, discussing things ad nauseam with them, a lot of which, you know, the outside
[Guest]: world would think is probably, you know, purely romanticism and doesn't have any bearing on
[Guest]: the larger world.
[Guest]: But even then, the crucial thing about JNU was your success or lack of success in politics
[Guest]: actually dependent on your ability to a do hard work, because, you know, it takes a lot
[Guest]: of your time, be your ability to sort of come up with arguments and counter arguments.
[Guest]: And the ideological spectrum was very different.
[Guest]: But this I think was the crux of the matter.
[Guest]: And unlike a lot of, you know, what people believe, it actually had a material bearing
[Guest]: on school.
[Guest]: For example, when we were students, we fought agitations.
[Guest]: So JNU, I don't know whether it's still the case, JNU used to, even though the fees etc
[Guest]: were really low, it used to give scholarships to students who came whose family income was
[Guest]: below a certain threshold, I think when we were students, it was 75,000 rupees per year.
[Guest]: So this was only for BA, MA.
[Guest]: Now the question, you know, which we found most difficult was, once you finished your
[Guest]: MA, you got into an MPhil or a PhD program, now, technically, that's work research in
[Guest]: any first world country, you paid a lot of money for that.
[Guest]: In JNU, that was not the case, be India still doesn't have that kind of a developed sort
[Guest]: of academic labor market where you could go out and earn your money.
[Guest]: Those days projects are always still coming.
[Guest]: So making ends meet was really a difficult thing to do.
[Guest]: And even if you come from a relatively well off family or not so poor family, you can't
[Guest]: ask your family for no sort of supporting yourself beyond post graduation.
[Guest]: So we fought an agitation and Professor Thorat used to be the UGC chairman and some sort
[Guest]: of a scholarship started, it was bare minimum to make ends meet 3000-5000 rupees.
[Guest]: So politics was, you know, identifying what these material problems were trying to look
[Guest]: for a constituency in JNU, which would sort of identify with these demands and support
[Guest]: these demands.
[Guest]: And then, you know, having the larger ideological debates at the same time, for example, JNU,
[Guest]: so I joined JNU in four, now four is the year when the NDA one actually lost power.
[Guest]: So, you know, May were the elections and I went to JNU in July and I believe, but before
[Guest]: that, the five years JNU being JNU had problems with the first NDA regime as well.
[Guest]: Those were problems of a very different nature.
[Guest]: You know, there was Gujarat riots and all those things.
[Guest]: But then politics qualitatively shifted, I would say for the 10 years under the UPA government,
[Guest]: because the right wing challenge was not so much of a challenge, then it completely shifted
[Guest]: to things such as more scholarships, more hostels, etc, on the one hand, and then, you
[Guest]: know, issues such as say, the nuclear deal, you know, which is not it doesn't have a material
[Guest]: impact on you, but nevertheless, given JNU's ideological leanings is a big debate, Shingur
[Guest]: Nandigram was a watershed event in JNU, because CPM slash SFI, its student wing has always
[Guest]: enjoyed an intellectual hegemony, so to say.
[Guest]: But once the Shingur Nandigram thing happened, it really sort of gave a body blow to that
[Guest]: ideological hegemony.
[Guest]: So the 2007 elections were the first elections where the SFI lost all major posts.
[Guest]: And this had only happened once after the TNMN elections.
[Guest]: So JNU that way gives you a very rich political profile, I mean, and experience because you're
[Guest]: dealing with, I mean, pretty much everything under the sun.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, I mean, people who are voted are equally if not more likely to desert you
[Guest]: on those ideological issues for more concrete issues.
[Guest]: So that way, I think a lot of what you know, you know, the political arguments and I can
[Guest]: make or the way I can think JNU has contributed a lot to that.
[Amit Varma]: And what was the impetus behind your getting into politics to begin with?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was it that, okay, these things need to be done, and someone's got to do them and
[Guest]: I'm going to get into politics and get it done?
[Guest]: Well, there was no political ambition.
[Guest]: So when I joined SFI, I did not even know that it was a CPM student wing.
[Guest]: I think the biggest question was, see, for joining any kind of politics, you have to
[Guest]: have an instinct for social engagement that, you know, my world is not just me, but I want
[Guest]: to engage with the larger world.
[Guest]: But in my case, I think the most important thing was a sense of gratitude to what JNU
[Guest]: offered to a student like me, because life was very easy.
[Guest]: It was for the first time in my student life after having got out of my home, the comforts
[Guest]: of my home, I actually did not have to worry about anything else but my studies.
[Guest]: So it was this sense of gratitude, which, you know, sort of attracted me to JNU then
[Guest]: continues to attract me to JNU even today.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so in those years when you were sort of, you know, doing your MPhil, I think you
[Guest]: did an MPhil.
[Guest]: I finished my MPhil.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So in those years that you did an MPhil, and you also stood for president of the JNU.
[Guest]: I did.
[Guest]: And those elections never happened.
[Guest]: So JNU elections were stayed for the nonconformity to link the committee recommendations.
[Guest]: So I was a presidential candidate who never contested that way.
[Guest]: But I've been in the union and other smaller posts.
[Amit Varma]: So what were your sort of aspirations in those days?
[Amit Varma]: Like you told me, you don't always think you'll be a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: What were your sort of aspirations like, and also, what were your interests like, like
[Amit Varma]: your deep knowledge of data?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you started building up at that point in time?
[Amit Varma]: What were your influences like, how was your, like, who are the thinkers who influenced
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Amit Varma]: What are the books you would recommend to my listeners, for example?
[Guest]: There are two ways to look at it, the place where I come from in the country, higher education
[Guest]: actually went down the drain in Bihar in the 70s itself.
[Guest]: So there's been a large intellectual void, so to say.
[Guest]: And education, because if you could afford it, you would get out of Bihar, it was as
[Guest]: simple as that.
[Guest]: Anybody who could afford it would not do his or her college or university education in
[Guest]: Bihar, unless you wanted to make a complete disaster out of your academic career or professional
[Guest]: career.
[Guest]: So as long as I was at home, education meant a degree of professional success.
[Guest]: You get good marks in class 10, then you go to class 12, you either get into a medical
[Guest]: school or an engineering school or things like that.
[Guest]: Then when I was in BA, it was many things put together.
[Guest]: Some of us wanted to prepare for the civil services, somebody, you know, management CAT
[Guest]: was a big thing, then some of us wanted to do, you know, places like JNU, D school and
[Guest]: probably go outside for GRE, etc.
[Guest]: When I came to JNU, I came with a very open mind, you know, none of these were foreclosed
[Guest]: options.
[Guest]: I'd never made up my mind.
[Guest]: Once the option started, and I saw that I had an interest in political economy, I gradually,
[Guest]: politics also played a role in it, I gradually made up my mind that I'll finish a PhD in
[Guest]: JNU, probably get a teaching job, as simple as that.
[Guest]: Now that never happened, because I never finished my PhD.
[Guest]: But the data bit, I think, again, JNU has a lot of role to play, because, you know,
[Guest]: the basic courses which we did, so even know things such as political economy of development,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: So for example, you know, my professor who eventually became my supervisor, Utsa Pattanaik,
[Guest]: she actually says that it is Lenin who discovered the Lorenz curve.
[Guest]: So Lenin, you know, he has this famous book called Development of Capitalism in Russia,
[Guest]: in which he plotted those curves.
[Guest]: So we were taught that unless your facts sort of back it up, you can't make an argument
[Guest]: that's not done.
[Guest]: Because no matter how ideologically persuasive it sounds, or no matter how much in agreement
[Guest]: everybody is in it, as far as research is concerned, you have to have some substantive
[Guest]: proof.
[Guest]: So data work is sacrosanct.
[Guest]: So I'm somebody who never did field for my research, but a lot of my research was based
[Guest]: on secondary NSS data, I worked on the public distribution system, etc.
[Guest]: So it was then that I realized that, you know, you have to have some factual thing, a lot
[Guest]: of my time as a political activist, so the only thing, you know, comparable to what a
[Guest]: journalist does, which I did in JNU was because JNU has this culture of distributing dinner
[Guest]: pamphlets.
[Guest]: So on your mess table, every day, there are pamphlets.
[Guest]: And because I happen to be in the SFI, anybody who leads an organization has to write those
[Guest]: pamphlets.
[Guest]: So four o'clock, we would decide, you know, what to write on.
[Guest]: And within an hour, you had to produce this 600 word copy.
[Guest]: And that is the closest thing I did, a journalist does, you know, as far as JNU is concerned.
[Guest]: But again, then, you say, if you look at the budget, etc, the one way was to go about it
[Guest]: was to know just throw adjectives, and everybody would agree even then, but the other way was
[Guest]: to actually look at data.
[Guest]: So for example, if the budget has come, what has happened to say educational allotment,
[Guest]: this scholarship, that scholarship, etc.
[Guest]: Even when you were negotiating with the administration.
[Guest]: So the fact that data was a useful skill set to have, you know, academically as well as
[Guest]: not to be in a political argument is something JNU taught me.
[Guest]: And that always stayed with me, because, you know, I was never very good at, you know,
[Guest]: other quantitative stats, such as game theory, or microeconomics, etc.
[Guest]: So that was the natural sort of leaning I acquired, and I used to like it also.
[Guest]: So, you know, for a brief while between journalism and JNU, I was in research there also, I was
[Guest]: looking at food security, I mean, how the Americans support their farm, agriculture,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And every day, I would realize that if you add the numbers, your case become really strong.
[Guest]: So that is how data happened to me.
[Guest]: Once again, I think, part of my academic political training, whatever one might call it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it strikes me that while data is objective, the numbers are what they are,
[Amit Varma]: the facts are what they are.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned before this, when we were having lunch before the recording, that the
[Amit Varma]: useful thing about data is that it makes you question your prior beliefs and your biases,
[Amit Varma]: you have to back it up with data.
[Amit Varma]: But isn't it also the case that there is so much of data that you can, you know, use data
[Amit Varma]: to almost support any conclusion, you can cherry pick data, you can, you know, torture
[Guest]: data till it confesses the truth, as someone famously said.
[Guest]: No, exactly.
[Guest]: This is something I try and bring out on my own work as well now as a journalist.
[Guest]: For example, if we were to look at, say, the unemployment rate in India, latest figures
[Guest]: show that some 6.1%.
[Guest]: Even when it was not that high, if you were to compare, say, unemployment rate in a country
[Guest]: like India with a with an OECD country, I mean, the rates there would probably be much
[Guest]: higher.
[Guest]: Because, you know, being unemployed in a first world country and being unemployed in a country
[Guest]: like India are completely different things.
[Guest]: I mean, an NREGA worker is technically considered employed in India.
[Guest]: That would not be the case in, say, Sweden, or even in the United States, for most of
[Guest]: the people in the US at least.
[Guest]: So you of course, have to know the context in which the data is being, I mean, given
[Guest]: to you.
[Guest]: And which is why, you know, rather than one data point, you have to have multiple data
[Guest]: points.
[Guest]: And, and, you know, you have to know what, what exactly is the data point you're looking
[Guest]: at, you know.
[Guest]: For example, in demonetization, a lot of people said that, you know, because these cash hoards
[Guest]: would be purchased, so we will get rid of black money.
[Guest]: Somebody who has done his or her basic economics would know that that is not the case.
[Guest]: Now there are stocks and there are flows.
[Guest]: Black money, we know is a flow variable.
[Guest]: So if I had 1000 rupees of black money sitting in my pocket, if it were to get extinguished
[Guest]: today, in six months from now, I probably had 2000 rupees of black money in my pocket.
[Guest]: So I think it is extremely important, especially in journalism, because and this is something,
[Guest]: once again, I value a lot from my initial days, as long as I was in school, probably
[Guest]: the only nonfiction I've ever read in my life are newspapers, because you know, places in
[Guest]: Bihar, even today, I do not think a very strong library culture, etc.
[Guest]: So all my knowledge about the world was either from TV or newspapers.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: I mean, people take extremely seriously what is written in newspapers.
[Guest]: I mean, I would not say that for television today, but at least even today, newspapers,
[Amit Varma]: if people read them, they take it very seriously.
[Amit Varma]: And in your case, it was like English newspapers or Hindi also?
[Guest]: I was not very comfortable reading English newspapers until school, but I would read
[Guest]: Hindi papers.
[Guest]: It was more a language problem rather than anything else.
[Guest]: The moment I got comfortable with English, I started reading English newspapers.
[Guest]: But so I think it is our duty to sort of, you know, do our own hard work and get our
[Guest]: own concepts right while we are dealing with data, that I consider is extremely important.
[Guest]: And not all data, you know, should be presented in the form of jargon, etc.
[Guest]: Basic things such as and I think it is more important to use data to ask questions rather
[Guest]: than answer them.
[Guest]: Now, for example, we know that, you know, everybody knows that four quarters GDP growth
[Guest]: has been declining.
[Guest]: That's there.
[Guest]: So what does one make out of it?
[Guest]: Who does it impact?
[Guest]: Which sectors is it impacting?
[Guest]: What should we you know, a lot of people on the left, for example, used to say that, you
[Guest]: know, this entire obsession with trickle down growth theory that, you know, growth should
[Guest]: be the be all and end all of economic policy is not good.
[Guest]: This is neoliberal.
[Guest]: All right, well taken.
[Guest]: But today, when the GDP declines, I mean, how do the same people go and criticize the
[Guest]: government for growth, then you have to have a larger theory or an explanation of who's
[Guest]: getting impacted by this deceleration in growth, how much I think as journalists, we need to
[Guest]: sort of answer those questions, and also ask those questions, because there are a lot of
[Guest]: people about today's world economy, polity, these are the two things I am comfortable
[Guest]: with, I'm sure applies to a lot of other things as well, where we do not know the answers.
[Guest]: But I think at least an attempt has to be made, especially, you know, from the profession
[Guest]: I work in journalism to be able to ask those questions.
[Amit Varma]: And have there been moments where, for example, you've gone into looking at a subject with
[Amit Varma]: certain prior assumptions, and found and changed your mind after looking at the data completely?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there something memorable like that, which you remember?
[Guest]: Well, there's one puzzle, which I know, I think we need some more data points.
[Guest]: For example, this entire demonetization thing which happened now the government said that
[Guest]: it'll aid, you know, tax collection, etc, because the tax base will widen up and all
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Now, this budget, there's been a shortfall, but the income tax numbers, you know, have
[Guest]: still been growing quite, quite robustly.
[Guest]: Even after demonetization, corporate tax is not growing, GST is not growing.
[Guest]: So how much of it is because of demonetization?
[Guest]: How much of it is because of normal things is something no, because no, I've criticized
[Guest]: demonetization a lot in my academic works, and I'm not the only one who's criticized it,
[Guest]: a lot of people have done that.
[Guest]: But the data doesn't allow me to still make a substantive final argument that this is
[Guest]: what we know about say demonetization's impact on income tax collections.
[Guest]: Now, we know that those tall claims are probably will never be made, but has there been some
[Guest]: impact?
[Guest]: Has there not been an impact?
[Guest]: I would still like to wait for some time.
[Guest]: So this is where I think data becomes useful.
[Guest]: It prevents you from sort of, you know, grandstanding about your own ideas or your own prejudices
[Guest]: if one could use the word.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I've also ranted and raved about demon and I have a bunch of episodes on it,
[Amit Varma]: which are linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: But then, you know, that brings me to the question of what do you do when data sources
[Amit Varma]: aren't adequate, or when they are not adequately trustworthy?
[Amit Varma]: For example, demon, it would be fair to assume that a significant part of the impact was
[Amit Varma]: on the informal sector.
[Amit Varma]: And we don't have direct data from the informal sector, one has to make sort of assumptions
[Amit Varma]: based on other proxies.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and even apart from the informal sector, where data is a problem, there's also
[Amit Varma]: the growing issue of how much of data which comes from the government is reliable anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Like I had an episode recently on the GDP with economist Rajeshwari Sengupta, and who's
[Amit Varma]: in sort of an expert on it.
[Amit Varma]: And it left me alarmed because at the end of it, the feeling I got was that GDP has
[Amit Varma]: now become less of an economic measure and more of a political rhetorical tool.
[Amit Varma]: And if you can't trust those kinds of figures that the government puts out, and if you don't
[Amit Varma]: have independent means of getting that kind of data yourself, then what is one to do?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, do you then rely on some kind of jugaad with the data that is available and that you
[Amit Varma]: know is reliable?
[Guest]: Or how do you navigate that?
[Guest]: As far as the particular question about GDP is concerned, I think and you know, it is
[Guest]: unfortunate that that is the case, unless the government, like you said, decides to,
[Guest]: you know, sort of make it open to at least an independent panel of economists, experts,
[Guest]: we would never know.
[Guest]: That's sad for a country like us, we are not some banana republic, we are a big country,
[Guest]: in terms of population in terms of our economic size in the world.
[Guest]: But then I think it becomes and, you know, these debates, you know, are so politically
[Guest]: colored now that it is impossible to sort of, you know, pinpoint as to who's being objective
[Guest]: and who is not because any criticism is then painted in the same brush by the other side.
[Guest]: And somebody, you know, who makes an argument that maybe it is not 4.5, but five would also
[Guest]: be put in some bracket or the other.
[Guest]: I think in that case, as a journalist, you know, because I am not an academic now, you
[Guest]: know, my work as a journalist does not give me the luxury to sort of, you know, go back,
[Guest]: I'm not saying journalists should not do that.
[Guest]: You know, sometimes we try and do that, with subjects we like, or we think, you know, we
[Guest]: can actually make some original contribution to but day to day, it is not possible for
[Guest]: journalists to take a deep dive into each and every subject, I think then it is important
[Guest]: to realize at least individually as to what you can and what you cannot do.
[Guest]: And if beyond the point, there's nothing you can add to the GDP debate.
[Guest]: Now there are people who have much higher stakes, for example, you know, before the
[Guest]: RBI monetary policy meetings, Reuters does this poll of economists.
[Guest]: So now a lot of them have rating agencies, brokering agencies, you know, these trading
[Guest]: firms, etc, they have started doing their own work.
[Guest]: So for them, the stakes are higher, they probably can't sort of accept it as fait accompli,
[Guest]: which we as journalists have to do, unfortunately, that's one.
[Guest]: But the other thing which you said, you know, is more interesting, because what if data
[Guest]: sort of doesn't allow you to understand things, you know, or the data which is presented,
[Guest]: I, let's say the data is not bad, but sometimes data can be half truth.
[Guest]: You know, for example, because, you know, I write on agriculture often, I consider the
[Guest]: farmer suicide data to be a classic example of it.
[Guest]: Now, there's a lot of song and dance about hundreds of 1000s of farmers have committed
[Guest]: suicide in our country, after economic reforms, etc.
[Guest]: That is a terrible thing.
[Guest]: I do not for a moment sort of endorse what has happened.
[Guest]: But should we as a country take, you know, farmer suicides as the ultimate proof of whether
[Guest]: or not there exists farmer distress in country.
[Guest]: Now, most of the farmer suicides in our country, they happen either in Vidarbha or Andhra Pradesh,
[Guest]: they used to happen in Kerala, Wayanad, etc.
[Guest]: But so basically, it is commercially driven farmers which commit suicide.
[Guest]: Now, you will find very few cases of farmer suicides from say Bihar or Eastern Uttar Pradesh,
[Guest]: which are among the or Odisha or West Bengal, which are among the poorest parts of the country.
[Guest]: Does that mean that there's no agrarian distress or rural distress in these parts of the country?
[Guest]: I would say there's probably more rural distress if one were to take into account just poverty
[Guest]: and sort of inability to make ends meet.
[Guest]: So why does the farmer suicide data not show in these states because agriculture is driven
[Guest]: by a completely different set of considerations there, an average farmer in Bihar is only
[Guest]: interested in, you know, growing enough wheat or rice, probably or a poor lentil to sort
[Guest]: of grow enough to feed yourself and maybe sell a little and then rest of the time when
[Guest]: you're not cultivating, you actually go and work as construction worker or something.
[Guest]: So I think it is in these things where half truths, you know, being captured by data become
[Guest]: sort of the guiding pole of discussion around very serious issues in our country is where
[Guest]: we have to be really careful.
[Guest]: For example, the informal thing.
[Guest]: Now, I think it is equally important to keep harping upon the fact that we do not know
[Guest]: what is happening to the informal sector in our country.
[Guest]: I mean, you have to keep harping upon it and people have to understand that GDP numbers
[Guest]: probably do not mean a lot for.
[Guest]: So with the same amount of GDP growth, pre-GST, post-GST life would have become completely
[Guest]: different for the informal sector in our country, because margins would have taken a deep hit.
[Guest]: So these are things I think, which have not been emphasized upon adequately, you know,
[Guest]: and I think Western journalism, you know, things like the Financial Times and a lot
[Guest]: of other things have a lot of good things to teach us when it comes to journalism.
[Guest]: And I've always been a believer in the fact that, you know, wherever good things you can
[Guest]: learn from, you should always learn.
[Guest]: But to look at and understand a country like India, which still has a very large informal
[Guest]: sector, a lot of its workforce, almost half of it still depends on agriculture.
[Guest]: I think in those areas, you know, even the globally established best practices, best
[Guest]: works, best minds, especially in the journalistic profession cannot help us in understanding
[Guest]: our country.
[Guest]: There, you know, there has to be some sort of a concerted effort to develop indigenous
[Guest]: thinking, indigenous methods, reportage, analysis, whatever that it might be, to help our own
[Amit Varma]: case, I would say.
[Amit Varma]: And also, is it like I'm just thinking aloud, you mentioned sort of the farmer suicides.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, when you look at data like that, there are so many things you can do
[Amit Varma]: with that data, you can make different kinds of political cases with that data, depending
[Amit Varma]: on how you look at it, you can try to contextualize it by saying, okay, if this is a suicide rate
[Amit Varma]: among farmers, what is the rate among housewives?
[Amit Varma]: And if it's worse among housewives, what does that mean?
[Amit Varma]: And should we then ignore the former data, and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, as a journalist, when you're a journalist, do you find that whatever your
[Amit Varma]: prior inferences might be, or whatever your biases might be?
[Amit Varma]: Because I mean, frankly, everybody is biased, but you try to be as objective as possible
[Amit Varma]: in your reportage.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, but human beings are all biased without exception, but you try to guard against
[Amit Varma]: bias or be transparent.
[Amit Varma]: So do those sort of your philosophical leanings and your the principles that you hold also
[Amit Varma]: then influence the questions that you ask of the data, and therefore influence the directions
[Guest]: that you go in?
[Guest]: I think that is the honest way to go about it.
[Guest]: So the farmer suicide case is a bit straightforward, because thankfully, the NCRB included a subcategory
[Guest]: in its data.
[Guest]: So it now lists reason for suicide.
[Guest]: And if you look at those reasons, actually, you know, most farmers commit suicide due
[Guest]: to economic distress, crop failure or economic distress, etc.
[Guest]: That one pretty much stands out.
[Guest]: Now, let us go into a more controversial topic, let us look at the election results we've
[Guest]: had to 2019.
[Guest]: Now, we know that this is a phenomenal victory, which the Bharatiya Janata Party has sort
[Guest]: of pulled.
[Guest]: Now, a lot of people, you know, liberals, those leaning on the left would like us to
[Guest]: believe that, if not all, an overwhelming driver of this victory has been, you know,
[Guest]: the Bharatiya Janata Party's and its leaders' abilities to sort of polarize the electorate
[Guest]: and communal lines.
[Guest]: That is what we are told at least.
[Guest]: Now, this is something the BJP has been doing for ever since its inception, that that's
[Guest]: its core politics from Ram Janmabhoomi to many other things.
[Guest]: Is it just that?
[Guest]: Or is there more to this victory, you know, it could be national security, it could be
[Guest]: pro-poor programs.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, we in India still do not have that kind of detailed, you know, election
[Guest]: data.
[Guest]: I mean, the CSDS does some transparent surveys, but the sample size, etc. are still small.
[Guest]: Those numbers are still not out in the public realm, they probably take their own time to
[Guest]: release them.
[Guest]: On questions like these, I think, is where the real test comes.
[Guest]: Now, what do you do?
[Guest]: Because there's no easily accessible data.
[Guest]: You have, you would like to believe, well, let me put it this way, I mean, whether or
[Guest]: not you'd like to believe there's a convenient set of explanations, you know, which are being
[Guest]: forwarded by people who are otherwise very established in their academic careers.
[Guest]: So what do you do?
[Guest]: I think this is also a challenge for people, you know, who are doing this kind of work
[Guest]: in our generation, because, you know, if we look at the world today, globally, you know,
[Guest]: polarization is increasing.
[Guest]: A lot of leaders, very powerful leaders, I mean, our Prime Minister is one example, we
[Guest]: have Donald Trump, who are, you know, treading into waters which were considered, I would
[Guest]: say, the unimaginable, you know, for the United States President to be making the kind of
[Guest]: statements he's making, etc.
[Guest]: So these are very different times.
[Guest]: Economically, these are very difficult times also.
[Guest]: So we know that economically, things are not going to be as good as they were even 10 years
[Guest]: ago.
[Guest]: Now, when there is economic distress, when there is a lot of polarization already happening,
[Guest]: how do you explain the world?
[Guest]: How do you even try and engage with the world?
[Guest]: Now, data can be one bit, but I think the correct approach as far as, you know, or at
[Guest]: least the one which I try and take is, I mean, look at the data, because that's not at least
[Guest]: sacrosanct and the good part in India is, you know, most of the data actually comes
[Guest]: from the government.
[Guest]: So if you're using the government's own data, there's only a limit to which people can disagree
[Guest]: with you, including those, you know, in the government.
[Guest]: So that's the good part about using data.
[Guest]: But I think then one also has to have a very sort of open mind, you know, you asked me
[Guest]: the question earlier about which are the thinkers I would sort of, I draw my thoughts from,
[Guest]: I think, you know, the kind of world we are in today, and there's not one thinker, who
[Guest]: you can use to sort of explain the world, you know, for example, let us look at somebody
[Guest]: like Bawasaheb Ambedkar.
[Guest]: I think in today's India, if there's one politician slash leader who is admired by everybody across
[Guest]: the political spectrum, now, the RSS, BJP has a lot of problems with Jawaharlal Nehru,
[Guest]: I mean, they do not say so explicitly, but they have a lot of problems with a lot of
[Guest]: things Mahatma Gandhi also did.
[Guest]: But Bawasaheb Ambedkar is one person with whom everybody now the communists also used
[Guest]: to be critical of him earlier from from the from the ultra left to the ultra right sort
[Guest]: of eulogizes Bawasaheb Ambedkar.
[Guest]: If you were to read his writings in entirety, I think Bawasaheb would be the most hated
[Guest]: political figure in this country today, because he's really spoken in mind and all sorts of
[Amit Varma]: issues.
[Guest]: In fact, especially hated by the Hindu right wing.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Difficult to say a lot of people would hate him for a lot of reasons.
[Guest]: So, you know, I have been trained in a leftist tradition.
[Guest]: So I of course think you know that the basic thing you know, which sort of Marx Lenin etc
[Guest]: still holds a lot of, but, you know, you could say that you draw your basic larger analysis
[Guest]: from the Marxian scheme, but there's no socialism in today's world.
[Guest]: I mean, I cannot envisage a socialism which does not allow me free markets, or that basically,
[Guest]: but no, a lot of people on the left today celebrate basic liberties, what kind of civil
[Guest]: liberties did the Soviet Union allow to its people?
[Guest]: What kind of civil liberties does China allow to its people?
[Guest]: I mean, you say our country, you know, this communal politics, etc, look at what China
[Guest]: is doing to Muslims who have been put in those camps.
[Guest]: So I do not think there's a grand narrative today, which fits the world.
[Guest]: But I also think that, and it'll probably become more important, I think we have to
[Guest]: the fact that India and you know, my formal training is in economics.
[Guest]: So my knowledge of history and know politics in relatively much poor compared to what the
[Guest]: student of politics or history would have.
[Guest]: But the more I try and read about it, the more I get fascinated with the fact that India
[Guest]: as it were, we were able to arrive at this constitutional consensus to sort of adopt
[Guest]: a constitution.
[Guest]: And what we have managed is, of course, in the third world, sort of unparalleled, I mean,
[Guest]: we look at our neighbors, we look at other third world countries, emerging markets, etc.
[Guest]: without a political shock to our democracy, barring the emergency, which also, you know,
[Guest]: the transition to democracy was, I would say, relatively much more peaceful than what other
[Guest]: countries have had to have without a major economic crisis.
[Guest]: And no, when we talk about the 91 balance of payment crisis, etc.
[Guest]: But that basically involved shipping some gold from here to London, I mean, look at
[Guest]: the kind of economic crisis East Asian countries have had Latin American countries have to
[Guest]: add.
[Guest]: So by and large, we have, you know, emerged pretty much sort of unharmed.
[Guest]: Now, I think India has to change.
[Guest]: I mean, it can't be the way it has been, for example, is something I always say, you know,
[Guest]: so a lot of people on the left today say that if you want to counter Narendra Modi, you
[Guest]: have to have a Bernie Sanders or you have to have a Jeremy Corbyn, etc.
[Guest]: Now, for people like say, Sanders or Corbyn to be able to know indulge in the kind of
[Guest]: rhetoric they are doing, and you know, a lot of which I agree with, but that is besides
[Guest]: the point.
[Guest]: I think it draws traction from the fact that both the United States, UK, etc, they at least
[Guest]: know after the Second World War had a golden age, I mean, where social security, education,
[Guest]: economy, everything was in a really good shape.
[Guest]: I don't think that was the case in India ever.
[Guest]: So if one were to ask, you know, say, intergenerationally or otherwise, also, I do not think there are
[Guest]: a handful of people, you know, who who might be like that, but most people are actually
[Guest]: materially well off in India even today compared to what they were earlier.
[Guest]: So we need to have a different kind of a theory for it.
[Guest]: I mean, this is something I dwelt on in my last piece also, I mean, class in the classic
[Guest]: sense of the term as we stand it, for example, in the old left rhetoric of Tata, Billa, etc.
[Guest]: I mean, today, Adani Ambani has replaced the Tata Billa.
[Guest]: I think the average man on the person on the street loves Mukesh Ambani for the geophones
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, we have cheapest data in our country today, or for the Mumbai Indians
[Guest]: entertainment where you could be but talking in terms of materially, I mean, telecom revolution
[Guest]: in our country, IT revolution in our country, these are all genuine capitalist driven innovations
[Guest]: which are which our country has really exploited.
[Guest]: We talk of the IT boom today, you know, I talked about JNU, for example, I said, you
[Guest]: know, JNU, you know, being cheap fees, etc, subsidized education that it was, but JNU has
[Guest]: only produced a handful of people like me.
[Guest]: If we talk about our success in the IT boom, because of which a lot of remittances come
[Guest]: into our country, a lot of people in my generation, our generation are employed in those sectors.
[Guest]: This was these are all private engineering colleges.
[Guest]: I mean, your IITs could only have produced so many graduates, I mean, thousands and thousands
[Guest]: of engineering graduates which we are producing, because of private sector in education.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, there have to be certain things which are sacrosanct, civil liberty
[Guest]: should be one, basic health and education should be one.
[Guest]: But you largely have to have a political framework, even if, you know, you want to criticize any
[Guest]: regime, be it this regime or the earlier regime or the next regime which comes.
[Guest]: I think you have to have a way to sort of evolve on your existing successes.
[Guest]: In case of India, in case of, you know, for example, you know, there were 1,001 million
[Guest]: problems with the Soviet Union, but it did certain good things to the world.
[Guest]: There was universal suffrage after the Soviet Union came into being, etc.
[Guest]: So I think the successes of the past have to be sort of, I mean, imbibed.
[Guest]: And then you can't ask for going back to say the past.
[Guest]: That is how I think political thinking has to evolve in our country, especially in today's
[Guest]: times.
[Guest]: You have to know what I mean, for example, I would love to read all of what Bawasabha
[Guest]: Medkar said, I would love to read more about the Constituent Assembly debates, I've not
[Guest]: read about them at all.
[Guest]: But you have to bring those kinds of debates into focus.
[Guest]: What is at stake?
[Guest]: How did we agree on what we actually agreed on?
[Guest]: Were there pending disagreements about important things which were, you know, where the attitude
[Guest]: of the political class was, so to say, kick the can down the road?
[Guest]: I think those kinds of debates have to be revived today have to be engaged with to be
[Guest]: able to construct any meaningful political civil discourse in our country.
[Amit Varma]: I think what I largely find and this is a lament is that instead of a deepening of the
[Amit Varma]: discourse, the way you just mentioned, what we are seeing is a shallowing out of the discourse
[Amit Varma]: where at least in the public discourse, what you see is increasing polarizations as people
[Amit Varma]: take essentially tribal positions, which, you know, brings me back to your earlier point
[Amit Varma]: that you made that, you know, that when you take something like these 2019 election results,
[Amit Varma]: and they can be interpreted in so many different ways, and people will just stick whatever
[Amit Varma]: narrative they want on it, where some people will say this shows that India is bigoted,
[Amit Varma]: and some people will, you know, you can make different narratives out of it.
[Amit Varma]: And all of which may be true or false to different degrees.
[Amit Varma]: But the question here is that, even as a journalist, when you work with data for either journalists
[Amit Varma]: or public intellectuals, there's also partly the expectation that in some way, you will
[Amit Varma]: help to make sense of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And in some way, that will involve creating perhaps a narrative of your own, however,
[Amit Varma]: it might be more nuanced than the other narratives out there.
[Amit Varma]: But however, nuanced, it might be creating a narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And my question when you work with data is that, in the social sciences, how easy is
[Amit Varma]: it to do that?
[Amit Varma]: For example, I mean, it's very hard to when you talk about public policy to infer causation,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, figure out what is causation and what is merely correlation, like an economist
[Amit Varma]: who's been a frequent guest on my show, Shruti Rajagopal, and she once gave me a really good
[Amit Varma]: example of this.
[Amit Varma]: She said, let's say you want to figure out if dropping a coin in water will raise the
[Amit Varma]: level of the water or not.
[Amit Varma]: Now you can arrive at it through scientific first principles and say that, yeah, of course
[Amit Varma]: it will.
[Amit Varma]: Or you can say, we'll do an experiment.
[Amit Varma]: And within a lab and control conditions, you take a beaker of water, you measure the length,
[Amit Varma]: you put a coin, you measure the height again, and you know what it is.
[Amit Varma]: But in social sciences, the equivalent of that is you are in a large swimming pool with
[Amit Varma]: many people bobbing in and out, and you drop a coin in that swimming pool.
[Amit Varma]: And then you try to measure the height of the water.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes it will be up, sometimes it will be down.
[Amit Varma]: On what basis are you going to infer causation?
[Amit Varma]: So when you look at all the data that emerges out of our madly messy society and our madly
[Amit Varma]: messy economy, isn't that a sort of a problem that you face that you are supposed to make
[Amit Varma]: sense of all of this?
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, how do you handle that challenge?
[Guest]: There are two, three ways about it.
[Guest]: First, like you said, I think, even today, you know, it might seem a cliche for the people
[Guest]: who actually know the subject.
[Guest]: I think as journalists, it is our duty not to sort of engage with, you know, the experts
[Guest]: or the converted, but to the larger audience, which in India, I still believe, sincerely
[Guest]: looks up to journalism to give them information as unbiased as it can be.
[Guest]: So I think the most important point is to reiterate the first principles.
[Guest]: We have to know what I or you might take for granted, you know, in terms of even inferring
[Guest]: the data that we have, sort of go out and educate the larger audiences.
[Guest]: For example, a couple of years ago, for Hindustan Times, on the day of the budget, we actually
[Guest]: did a large data piece explaining the basic things.
[Guest]: For example, what does a revised estimate and a budget estimate mean?
[Guest]: For us, it's obvious.
[Guest]: I mean, we know it.
[Guest]: But I think for the larger audience, even those bits of knowledge, I mean, we should
[Guest]: at no point of time consider explaining these basic things beneath us.
[Guest]: That I think is the first requirement of being a journalist.
[Guest]: You have to know you engage with at a very mass level.
[Guest]: The second thing is, I think what you said to point that out, that this is what actually
[Guest]: can happen now, because inflation under this government was, you know, very low, it doesn't
[Guest]: mean that all of it was a policy success.
[Guest]: Inflation was low also, because this government enjoyed for a very large part of it, the previous
[Guest]: government low oil prices, something as basic as that has to be explained.
[Guest]: I mean, bonds, the government is planning to issue them.
[Guest]: So a lot of people have written against it, a lot of people have written in favor of it.
[Guest]: I would like to do a piece at some point of time, you know, something as basic as this,
[Guest]: that note, you borrow $5 billion today, the exchange rate is 70 for $1 today, you expect
[Guest]: it to be 75 for $1 when you have to repay that loan in say five years, what if the exchange
[Guest]: rate were to be 90 per dollar, then the kind of money you have to pay, I mean, would increase
[Guest]: many folds.
[Guest]: Similarly, if the exchange rate were to go down, it probably make a windfall.
[Guest]: Then you go to another data point as to how the rupee has behaved.
[Guest]: So I think a step by step narrative, counting all the possibilities, which might or might
[Guest]: not happen, actually, this is my experience personally, for example, I am the happiest
[Guest]: when one day I write a piece in ST, then some class 11 student from say Jalandhar writes
[Guest]: a mail to me, then I really like this, I want to be a journalist, etc.
[Guest]: Has that happened?
[Guest]: Sometimes it does happen.
[Guest]: So that is what I really look forward to, because the experts, you know, I'm very grateful
[Guest]: to them that they promote my work, etc. but that is something where I do not have to make
[Guest]: an extra effort to sort of go and engage with them.
[Guest]: That is their subject of interest, they like it, they, you know, sometimes they also engage
[Guest]: with me to sort of promote me, encourage me, develop my own arguments.
[Guest]: But when I'm able to engage with a intelligent layperson reader, by not compromising the
[Guest]: basic method I do in my story writing is when I feel the happiest and I think that the future
[Guest]: for these kind of arguments to be made more and more people should be making it.
[Amit Varma]: So what you're saying is that your work is not just you don't view your work just as
[Amit Varma]: interpreting data and coming up with an explanation or a narrative of how things are, but also
[Amit Varma]: helping people see how the different kinds of data interact with each other, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: helping them better understand the complexity of it that the complexity of the swimming
[Amit Varma]: pool for that matter.
[Guest]: And right.
[Guest]: So, you know, as you mentioned earlier, I have this past as a political activist.
[Guest]: So knowing genuine, it's very common with the left.
[Guest]: So Marx has this famous quote of philosophers have only interpreted the world.
[Guest]: The point, however, is to change it.
[Guest]: I think when you're a journalist, only the first part of the phrase applies to you.
[Guest]: Your job is basically to interpret the world as well as you can, and list all possibilities.
[Amit Varma]: But you're basically helping change it also.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that boy in Jalandhar who wrote to you and you might one day go on to.
[Guest]: But I think this is also an extremely important thing.
[Guest]: And this is something I believe because you know, I've been on the other side of the world
[Guest]: as a political activist, and today I'm a journalist, and I think, you know, unless and until you're
[Guest]: writing opinion, there should not be an overlap in these two.
[Guest]: I mean, it is important for unbiased journalism.
[Guest]: But I think as journalists, we also need to understand that, you know, just because we
[Guest]: think and we always try to be writing what the truth is, it doesn't mean it'll have automatic
[Guest]: traction in the society.
[Guest]: Now, this is something which is not rocket science, a lot of philosophers, etc.
[Guest]: Marx has written on it that, you know, no matter whether an idea is true or false, the
[Guest]: kind of social traction, political traction it has, also depends on larger social conditions,
[Guest]: political conditions, etc.
[Guest]: So if you have that in mind, then it gives you a certain amount of I would say critical
[Guest]: distance or whatever one might call it, or no, or the ability to work very dispassionately
[Guest]: and objectively also.
[Guest]: That is something I consider myself lucky to have developed that thing early in my career.
[Amit Varma]: And as someone who looks at data on a daily basis, and perhaps reflexively, you look at
[Amit Varma]: the data in every subject that you do, do you look at columnists and opinion writers
[Amit Varma]: like myself, for example, and think ki yaar yeh hawa mein baat kar rahe hain, matlab it's
[Amit Varma]: not grounded in, because then it must seem very easy for anyone to just sit down and
[Amit Varma]: write an opinion column, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because if they don't have to back it up with data, whereas your work is around data, everything
[Amit Varma]: is around data.
[Amit Varma]: So does it change the way you look at other opinion writers, columnists, all of that?
[Guest]: So my newspaper, my idea of a newspaper, and this has never changed, you know, when I was
[Guest]: standing at five or six, and I used to read a Hindi newspaper, today I read a lot of newspapers,
[Guest]: I would probably like to read even more.
[Guest]: So my newspaper always used to finish at the op-ed pages.
[Guest]: So business, foreign, sports, I never looked at them throughout my life.
[Guest]: Now that I work in a newspaper, I realize how important they are.
[Guest]: So I think one thing which newspapers teach you is plurality and diversity of views is
[Guest]: extremely important.
[Guest]: And when I say views, I do not just mean views, I also mean work, you know, because, you know,
[Guest]: I might be doing data, somebody might be covering the BJP, somebody who might be looking at
[Guest]: personal finance, business papers have more than one reporter just tracking mutual funds.
[Guest]: I think, you know, all of those works are extremely important, including people who
[Guest]: write opinion pieces, because what it allows a journalist is, you know, like I said earlier,
[Guest]: I think good journalism in this country, even today has a lot of potential to bring intellect
[Guest]: levels up in our society.
[Guest]: Now, I might never have read a, what should I say, even the basic, you know, text of Ambedkar,
[Guest]: I have not read much of it, but a lot of people when they write, the fact that there exists
[Guest]: something like a constituent assembly debate, the fact that there was a debate on cow protection,
[Guest]: you know, in our country, when the constitution was being made, these are all things I've
[Guest]: learned from newspaper writings, popular writings.
[Guest]: I think this is where public intellectuals have a role to play.
[Guest]: And public intellectuals need not only be in universities or very high ranking think
[Guest]: tanks.
[Guest]: I think this is where all of us are public intellectuals have a very important role to
[Guest]: play.
[Guest]: We have to learn to agree to disagree, I will not agree with everything you say, etc.
[Guest]: But even then, I think it is extremely important, especially in today's conditions, when there
[Guest]: is a lot of social polarization, political polarization, that we get to engage, for example,
[Guest]: I would personally like to know a lot more about what Dindayal Upadhyay's writings are.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, I've never read them.
[Guest]: But no, when we have a prime minister, who's probably one of the most popular leaders in
[Guest]: my generation, the most popular leader, because I never saw Mrs. Gandhi, who swears by Dindayal
[Guest]: Upadhyay's ideology, who claims that the BJP is driven by Dindayal, I think there's some
[Guest]: merit in engaging with that.
[Guest]: So I would actually love to have a lot more people writing on what Dindayal Upadhyay wrote.
[Guest]: Now, you have to, there's good work in journalism, there's bad work in journalism, there's good
[Guest]: opinion writing, there's bad opinion writing.
[Guest]: But I think this is one of the beauties of free market and society, which has, I think,
[Guest]: a lot of freedom to write, read, engage, etc.
[Guest]: You can always go out and choose what you want to, I mean, the Indian journalistic scene
[Guest]: to me, I mean, is that we don't have a Walmart in country, but this is the Walmart of ideas,
[Guest]: I think, I mean, you can go and look at what you want to buy and don't want to buy.
[Guest]: I think it's very important.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that's beautifully said, and that strikes a chord with me also.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about having that multiplicity of kinds of journalism and ideas and all of
[Amit Varma]: that in a newspaper where you have a business page, a foreign page, and I usually go to
[Amit Varma]: the sports page first, so kindly judge me for it.
[Amit Varma]: But it doesn't worry you that in modern times, how people interact with content is changing
[Amit Varma]: to the extent that all of this is getting sort of, like earlier, what used to happen
[Amit Varma]: is that you get a daily newspaper at home, and everything is there is available to you
[Amit Varma]: when you flip through it, and you know, you may or may not read some things, but they're
[Amit Varma]: all available for you.
[Amit Varma]: And today, the way people discover content, discover media is mostly you'll go on Facebook
[Amit Varma]: or you follow a link on social media is all been kind of this aggregated, you don't get
[Amit Varma]: these filtered packages coming to you.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, you get I mean, there's a different kind of filter which comes at you from social
[Amit Varma]: media, it might even be a tribal filter, because social media is so increasingly polarized.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of people are being exposed, therefore, to only one specific kind of content and not
[Amit Varma]: to that broad, diverse sort of content that is there in our newspapers.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that I may be overstating or is it something that worries you for the
[Amit Varma]: future?
[Guest]: It should not happen in principle is something I agree on.
[Guest]: But you see, there are certain things which, you know, you have to take them as they come.
[Guest]: But I would say I mean, there was a time when there were no newspapers, the time when there
[Guest]: were no courts in our country, there was no, I mean, not just our country everywhere, society
[Guest]: has evolved.
[Guest]: So I think the news industry is also evolving today.
[Guest]: And there are no, I mean, you are only talking about the desirability aspect of it.
[Guest]: I mean, all of us who work in media know that there's a very big revenue aspect to it also.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Traditional business models in media are struggling.
[Guest]: Now I'm not somebody who understands a lot of it.
[Guest]: But working in a company, I know that how difficult things are today for everybody in
[Guest]: the media industry.
[Guest]: How we'll deal with those challenges, time will tell, there are more capable people than
[Guest]: me who would have to deal with these challenges.
[Guest]: I mean, free market also means that the ones who adapt survive, the ones who do not probably
[Guest]: do not survive.
[Guest]: But like I said, though, when I talk about it in terms of pure desirability, I think
[Guest]: the casualty which, you know, causation which one draws is that because, you know, Facebook
[Guest]: and WhatsApp and fake news and videos, etc, are happening.
[Guest]: This is why a certain kind of politics is sort of gaining traction in India, in the
[Guest]: world, etc.
[Guest]: I think that's partly true, but that's also not true.
[Guest]: The basic premise, you know, if you follow the sort of Marxian scheme of analysis is
[Guest]: that, you know, you were able to make a revolution in 1917, because majority of the people agreed
[Guest]: with the basic cause you were espousing, when Lenin said land, peace and bread, so many
[Guest]: people in what was then Russia later became Soviet Union came with him, made a revolution.
[Guest]: Today, if your premise is that, you know, I think OBC, you know, phrased it in the best
[Guest]: possible way that the Hindu mind has been hijacked.
[Guest]: I think you can't stop there.
[Guest]: I mean, if you believe and you know, I think there's an objective basis to saying that
[Guest]: a lot of people are financially in trouble, things are not as good as they were before
[Guest]: the crisis, a lot of our young generation who are getting out of colleges, universities,
[Guest]: etc, are not finding jobs.
[Guest]: Even if you are rich, you sort of having difficulties earlier, you could go to an engineering college,
[Guest]: probably go to the US now those things will not happen.
[Guest]: You even if your father can afford 20 lakhs for a private engineering college, you will
[Guest]: not get a job that easily, then ultimately, somebody has to go and build a political case
[Guest]: that here is what needs to be done.
[Guest]: I think, you know, this entire social media and no, I could sound a bit extremist when
[Guest]: I say that is an alibi for a failure to come up with an effective opposition to the kind
[Guest]: of right wing populism we are seeing, not just in our country, but in the world today.
[Guest]: I mean, you cannot say that we'll go back to the past.
[Guest]: So which is why probably a Hillary Clinton, you know, lost to Donald Trump.
[Guest]: I mean, people associated certain kinds of things with Hillary Clinton, the old elite.
[Guest]: I think, you know, however, and personally, I do disagree with a lot of political things
[Guest]: the present regime says, but I think the critique of the old elite stands and India today, thanks
[Guest]: to you know, pro market reforms, a lot of upward mobility, which has happened is a far
[Guest]: more democratized place, in terms of opportunities, and ideas also, they will not listen to the
[Guest]: old elite, they wanted I mean, I've seen in front of my own eyes in Delhi, you know, something
[Guest]: like an Ahmadi party growing up.
[Guest]: Now, I do not know where the Ahmadi party will go from here in the next election five
[Guest]: years down the line, they were very promising in Punjab at one point of time today, for
[Guest]: all practical purposes, they are a Delhi based party.
[Guest]: But the fact that in a city like city state like Delhi, which is a proper microcosm of
[Guest]: what India is, you have placed people from all over the country in the city, could grow
[Guest]: up as a political force capture the imagination of power, I think it also shows how open possibilities
[Guest]: of building alternative politics are.
[Guest]: And those kinds of options are open to everybody, I mean, it is not just that the BJP only circulates
[Guest]: fake news.
[Guest]: I mean, if I were to give one example, I think technology can never be an alibi of failing
[Guest]: to come up with social change.
[Guest]: I mean, then the Marxists would have packed their bags and gone long ago.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fantastic insight.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll continue chatting about the political economy and politics in particular, which
[Amit Varma]: I've been looking forward to talking about with you after the break.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another great week on the IBM podcast has been a really fun week.
[Unknown]: Also, just a reminder, if you're not following us on social media, please do we're IBM podcast
[Unknown]: on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
[Unknown]: One thing that we are trying to do as much of as possible and we want to keep doing this
[Unknown]: is if you hear something that you really enjoy, take a screenshot of it and tag us on whatever
[Unknown]: social media platform you prefer and we'll try and repost that.
[Unknown]: If you want to keep your listening light and funny this week, check out shows like Cyrus
[Unknown]: says Golgappa and the Empowering Series on Cyrus says Cyrus talks to hosts of another
[Unknown]: IBM show, Football Shitball, Gaurav Sapde, Karthik Iyer and Sivaram Padmanabhan.
[Unknown]: Tune in to listen to some fun conversation about sports advertising and Bollywood.
[Unknown]: On Golgappa, Tripti is joined by cinematographer Milan Zogh, who shares rib-tickling stories
[Unknown]: from his shoots.
[Unknown]: And on the Empowering Series, Zarina is joined by comedian Suresh Menon.
[Unknown]: They talk about his early days in comedy, his chemistry with Jose and how he started
[Unknown]: Kaan Masti.
[Unknown]: If pop culture is what's going to get your engine going this week, then you know, we
[Unknown]: got shows like Geekfruit where Tejas and Dishnu this week are rounding up the hits and misses
[Unknown]: of announcements made at Disney's D23 Expo.
[Unknown]: Mr. and Mrs. Binge Watch, you know, I mean like that's a really fun show where Janice
[Unknown]: and Arun talk about TV show runner Jenji Kohan and her extremely successful Netflix shows
[Unknown]: as Orange is the New Black and I can't remember the other one, but they've got another really
[Unknown]: good one too.
[Unknown]: On IBM Likes, Abbas, Antareksha and Darius discuss the film Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
[Unknown]: and rate their top five Tarantino films.
[Unknown]: Man, I wish they had called me to do that.
[Unknown]: So if you only have a really short time and you want to check out some of our shorter
[Unknown]: stuff, you can check out Origins of Things where Chuck narrates a brand origin story
[Unknown]: involving a tabloid and a gold digger.
[Unknown]: It's going to be fun guessing which brand this is.
[Unknown]: And on The Habit Course, Ashton shares some interesting facts about coffees and afternoon
[Unknown]: naps.
[Unknown]: And also don't forget to check out Urmi Kothari on the Kinetic Living podcast where she has
[Unknown]: Thriving Thursdays and Tabata Tuesdays, both of which are, if you want to be fit, you should
[Unknown]: do those things.
[Unknown]: On our new coming of age show, Agla Station Adulthood, host Ritasha and Ayushi discuss
[Unknown]: casual dating hookups and modern day love.
[Unknown]: On Keeping It Queer, Naveen Akbar had talked to producer Madhuri Adwani about body image
[Unknown]: issues.
[Amit Varma]: But with that, let's get you on with the show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Roshan Kishore about data journalism, about the political economy, which
[Amit Varma]: he writes about regularly.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, coming to sort of Indian politics now, you you've been a data journalism and
[Amit Varma]: sort of a data journalist and sort of in the thick of things during what is a transformative
[Amit Varma]: period in our politics.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about following politics during this time, you know, the 2014 elections,
[Amit Varma]: the 2019 elections.
[Amit Varma]: Has it?
[Amit Varma]: Have there been parts of it which are bewildering, which have taken you by surprise?
[Amit Varma]: And also how has a political, how has our politics changed during this time?
[Guest]: So, ironical as it may sound, my most bewildering political experience actually doesn't come
[Guest]: from doing data journalism, but going out in the field.
[Guest]: This is during the Madhya Pradesh assembly elections.
[Guest]: I think this was somewhere between Jabalpur and Bhopal district.
[Guest]: We went to a village, talking to a bunch of people.
[Guest]: All of these people were rooting for the Congress.
[Guest]: They were extremely angry with the BJP government, etc.
[Guest]: And we were having this conversation.
[Guest]: And then this guy tells me that when the Babri mosque was being demolished, he along with
[Guest]: all other villagers actually went to demolish it.
[Guest]: So here is a group of voters who were not just supporters, but active participants in
[Guest]: what is often and rightly thought of as one of the most communal acts of politics in our
[Guest]: country organized then, but they were not voting for the party they were still aligned
[Guest]: ideologically with.
[Guest]: I think that is how complicated politics has become in our country.
[Guest]: Or if I were to put it the other way, maybe politics has always been like that, but we
[Guest]: never realized it was the way like that.
[Guest]: So let us go back to the 2014 elections, Narendra Modi for the first time in 30 years got a
[Guest]: majority on his own, made a big thing.
[Guest]: A lot of explanation was that it is actually the anger against UPA2, you know, 2G and Commonwealth,
[Guest]: etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And then, you know, there was mixed evidence.
[Guest]: So 2014, you win these elections, then you have some success in Maharashtra, Haryana,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And then we come to Delhi 2015, the BJP is all but wiped out, you get just three seats.
[Guest]: Then no, you go to a completely different electoral battlefield, which is Bihar in 2015,
[Guest]: October.
[Guest]: Once again, somebody who's, who's been epitomized as the symbol of corruption, nepotism, etc,
[Guest]: by the BJP, Lalu Prasad Yadav pulls off a spectacular victory along with Nitish Kumar
[Guest]: with the BJP.
[Guest]: Then you again, you know, 16, the BJP is irrelevant, because it's Bengal, Kerala, Assam, they win,
[Guest]: but by and large, not major players.
[Guest]: Then no demonetization happens, then UP happens.
[Guest]: Then once again, there's a big bang, you know, the Bihar government falls under a bunch of
[Guest]: its own contradictions, because the BJP, Nitish Kumar said it openly was invincible, nobody
[Guest]: could defeat it.
[Guest]: So he made it very, very clear why he was going.
[Guest]: Then 17 onwards, we get into a completely different trajectory where the BJP manages
[Guest]: to somehow retain Gujarat, then 18, there was the shock defeats for the BJP.
[Guest]: So by the time we got to 2019, and I'm very honest about it, this was my personal belief
[Guest]: as well that it was anything but a closed race.
[Guest]: I mean, I did not see the BJP performing the way it did, because, you know, being a numbers
[Guest]: guy was actually looking at those previous numbers.
[Guest]: And if you look at previous assembly elections before 14, there was always 80% of the assembly
[Guest]: elections actually sort of manifested in the Lok Sabha elections, the trends.
[Guest]: So I thought there was no way the BJP could do what it ultimately ended up doing.
[Guest]: Now that it has happened, I think one has to try and go back and ask those questions
[Guest]: as to how it happened.
[Guest]: Now, there are a bunch of people who think that EVMs are rigged, etc.
[Guest]: I think all that is bogus.
[Guest]: I mean, as simple as that, because, you know, the same sets of EVMs, etc. are being used.
[Guest]: The biggest takeaway, I think, from the 19 victory of the BJP is that people in our country
[Guest]: are actually voting separately at different levels of government formation.
[Guest]: So they might elect somebody else to be the chief minister, they might elect somebody
[Guest]: else to their prime minister.
[Guest]: I mean, Odisha is a perfect example, it went to poll on the same day assembly and Lok
[Guest]: Sabha elections have drastically different results.
[Guest]: People voting in the same booth on the same day are voting for two different parties.
[Guest]: Now this is, this is a very big thing as far as Indian democracy is concerned, Indian politics
[Guest]: is concerned.
[Guest]: This also means that the BJP going from here, no, however implausible it sounds right now,
[Guest]: it sounded so in 2014, also might suffer reverses in state elections, but then the opposition
[Guest]: because it will not have to not be able to construct a popular sort of narrative, along
[Guest]: with a figure which is extremely important because now we are voting more for a leader
[Guest]: rather than a party and the BJP also has absolutely no pretence in acknowledging that it is a
[Guest]: vote for Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: These are very interesting times.
[Guest]: I think one has to have a substantive analysis of what Narendra Modi did.
[Guest]: Now mind you, in politics, there could be things which we think are counterproductive
[Guest]: something like demonetization, but could help politically.
[Guest]: There are things, you know, such as demolition of the Babri mosque, which we think is very
[Guest]: bad to do.
[Guest]: But democracy, you know, we have to accept it is also a rule of the majority.
[Guest]: So the majority of the people do not agree with an idea, however, right it is or agree
[Guest]: with the idea, however, preposterous and dangerous it is, then that idea always sort of carries
[Guest]: on in a democracy or we are a democracy.
[Guest]: So we have to think along those lines, what are the things which they did right, which
[Guest]: were also right for the larger interests of the country, the economy, the polity, which
[Guest]: they did right, which were otherwise counterproductive.
[Guest]: More importantly, what are the things which the opposition could not do, for example,
[Guest]: something like demonetization.
[Guest]: No, I still believe had the BJP been in opposition, the amount of public anger which would have
[Guest]: erupted against demonetization, and you remember Venezuela tried something similar when demonetization
[Guest]: exactly take it back, Venezuela is today a far more repressed democracy than India is.
[Guest]: But India did not have one credible protest against demonetization.
[Guest]: Now that speaks volumes about the failure of the opposition.
[Guest]: Now the crudest explanation could be a lot of people, grassroots leaders were actually
[Guest]: exchanging notes and you never know.
[Guest]: But to be able to encash popular anger against, you know, a lot of policies which we think
[Guest]: and some of which we rightly think are wrong, I think is also there also has to be an analysis
[Guest]: of what was done by the opposition and what was not.
[Guest]: So those are the two tracks in which I think any political analysis from now on must progress.
[Amit Varma]: And if you sort of look at the broad currents along which people vote, you know, what really
[Amit Varma]: happened around 89 and the 91 in that phase was that the two big issues that dominated
[Amit Varma]: Indian politics became Mandal and Mandir and they completely changed Indian politics.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written a recent piece called Mandal, Mandir and Markets where you talk about sort
[Amit Varma]: of these three M's.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember I think right after the election, I think it was Shekhar Gupta who wrote a piece
[Amit Varma]: where he said that there's another M which has completely surpassed all these M's, which
[Amit Varma]: is Modi.
[Amit Varma]: And his point really was that Mandal and Mandir are now irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: This is a Modi thing.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I believe there's some amount of data by Milan Vaishnava among others, which
[Amit Varma]: backs up that a lot of people sort of, a lot less people would have voted for the BJP in
[Amit Varma]: 2014, at least if Modi had not been the PM candidate.
[Amit Varma]: How do you view this evolution of why people vote?
[Amit Varma]: Are Mandal and Mandir and perhaps Markets still important reasons why people vote or
[Amit Varma]: is it a very personality driven thing now?
[Guest]: See, we were talking about it in the early part of the podcast, which is where you have
[Guest]: to sort of realize how much to read into the data which you have now when surveys say that
[Guest]: half of the people who voted for the BJP would probably not have voted for the BJP had Modi
[Guest]: not been the prime ministerial candidate.
[Guest]: We have to understand what is it that Modi brings to the BJP.
[Guest]: I mean, it is not that people like his face and vote for him.
[Guest]: I mean, it can't be.
[Guest]: I think Narendra Modi today probably is the not only is the biggest mass leader in this
[Guest]: country, he and under him the kind of BJP leadership which is developing.
[Guest]: They are also people who are deeply convinced about what their core politics should be.
[Guest]: So my generation, Narendra Modi is somebody now look at it from the BJP's point of view,
[Guest]: say a core BJP voter driven by Hindutva, etc.
[Guest]: Now, a lot of liberals actually try to turn 2002 against Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: Now, Narendra Modi has never gone on the defensive with that.
[Guest]: I think that plays a role in the psyche of the core BJP voter.
[Amit Varma]: That's a feature, not a bug.
[Guest]: He would never desert Narendra Modi because he stood the test of the time.
[Guest]: He's not somebody like a Lalkrishna Adwani who went to Jinnah's mausoleum and did what
[Guest]: he did.
[Guest]: Similarly, there are a lot of other things.
[Guest]: For example, you know, this entire thing, you know, we do not we did not have a 2002
[Guest]: unlike before the 2004 elections, we did not even have 2003 Muzaffarnagar unlike what happened
[Guest]: before the 2014 elections, which is what I've sort of argued in my Mandir Mandal Markets
[Guest]: piece.
[Guest]: Now, does that mean that there was no communal polarization before these elections?
[Guest]: Look at things that what is happening in Kashmir today, you know, 370, 35A, these are matters
[Guest]: of great detail.
[Guest]: These are matters of constitutional integrity.
[Guest]: What is the special status of Kashmir?
[Guest]: If Kashmir does not have a constituent assembly, can you even remove these articles?
[Guest]: If you were to do away with Article 370, will Kashmir technically be bound to be a part
[Guest]: of India?
[Guest]: We can debate ad nauseum about these things.
[Guest]: But when a political party goes to a hinterland constituency in say, Eastern UP or Bihar,
[Guest]: and poses this question that those who want 370 to stay are actually aiding and abetting
[Guest]: the cause of separatists in Kashmir, I think it makes an extremely powerful impact on the
[Guest]: voter.
[Guest]: When you go out and say that, you know, we are bringing the citizenship amendment bill
[Guest]: and all Hindus who are persecuted in say, Pakistan or Bangladesh or Afghanistan would
[Guest]: be granted a citizenship of this country, I think you are making a very powerful point.
[Guest]: Your core politics like it was in 2002, even today is intact.
[Guest]: And I think the voter gets those messages.
[Guest]: When you say that because Rahul Gandhi is contesting from Wayanad, which is a Muslim
[Guest]: majority seat, it basically means that the Congress is only looking at Muslim votes in
[Guest]: the 2019 elections.
[Guest]: It makes a very powerful point.
[Guest]: When the Prime Minister of India goes to a Gujarat election campaign and says that a
[Guest]: former Prime Minister of India actually conspired with Pakistan to get him killed, you know,
[Guest]: it's beyond the pale, but it strikes a chord.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I think it is the BJP today has mastered the art of keeping the communal pot simmering
[Guest]: without there being any large precipitation.
[Guest]: They would not have a Muzaffarnagar on their hands, they will not have a Godhra, Gujarat,
[Guest]: Ahmedabad, Naroda party on their hands, but the pot is still simmering.
[Guest]: So if we were to go back to the social science analogy, the BJP has actually mastered the
[Guest]: art of keeping the swimming pool empty.
[Guest]: So the only people who jump in the swimming pool will be people of their own choosing.
[Guest]: I think this has been a miserable failure of the opposition on that.
[Guest]: And this is something I say from a lot of personal experience.
[Guest]: I think it was in standard one when Lakhrishna Advani started a Ramshila Poojan Yatra, 89
[Guest]: was when the Bhagarpur riots happened in Bihar.
[Guest]: I mean, I remember our school was closed for a month because of communal tension.
[Guest]: Since then, the Hindu right wing has never stopped its own propaganda.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's Ayodhya, sometimes it will be Labh Jihad and right now it could be 370.
[Guest]: They kept changing whatever suits them to do.
[Guest]: The other side, on the other hand, always thought that the way to deal with it was not
[Guest]: to take it head on, but sort of build bypasses around it.
[Guest]: So in Bihar, Lalu Yadav built what is now famously referred to as an MY equation.
[Guest]: I have the Muslims which are captive because anyway, they can't vote for the BJP.
[Guest]: I'll get the Yadavs along and here in a first post the past system, I have this invincible
[Guest]: target vote share level of say 36%, which is enough to beat everybody else.
[Guest]: Narendra Modi and Amit Shah today are proving that that is not going to be enough because
[Guest]: we'll surpass 50% in each and every state.
[Guest]: That is the next level they've taken in the politics.
[Guest]: So I think it is extremely important to realize what the success of the present leadership
[Amit Varma]: of the BJP is.
[Amit Varma]: And it also seems to me that there's an apparent contradiction there which bewilders me.
[Amit Varma]: So on one hand, I completely agree with you that a lot of the support for Modi is not
[Amit Varma]: necessarily because of his personality and all of that, but because he stands for a vision
[Amit Varma]: and an ideology which people feel deeply.
[Amit Varma]: But also it is true that just as the BJP has an ideological purity, which no other party
[Amit Varma]: has because other parties don't really stand for something which is as powerful within
[Amit Varma]: Indian culture, but also a parallel strand of the BJP political movement in the last
[Amit Varma]: few years has been a will to power perhaps, you know, led by the political strategy of
[Amit Varma]: Amit Shah, where he almost does a mergers and acquisitions things where you're always
[Amit Varma]: constantly acquiring people from other parties, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you'll go to the Northeast and you'll acquire people and Gujarat elections or Goa elections,
[Amit Varma]: whatever happens, you'll acquire some people and you'll do whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems almost contradictory to this because on the one hand, you stand for ideological
[Amit Varma]: purity.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you're bringing in people you opposed and who opposed you very
[Amit Varma]: strongly into your fold.
[Amit Varma]: And almost like saying that, okay, we'll be this broad umbrella, you know, and it's been
[Amit Varma]: very successful for them both in terms of bringing other politicians into the party
[Amit Varma]: and managing to form governments and so on and decimating the opposition.
[Amit Varma]: It's also that broadening of their typical social base has also been successful in terms
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, for example, famously getting non-Yadav OBCs in UP, non-Jatav Dalits and
[Amit Varma]: in fact, they now, you know, in both elections, they've had a larger share of the Dalit vote
[Amit Varma]: than the Congress has.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a sort of a contradiction here that on one hand, it stands for this firm kind
[Amit Varma]: of ideological purity and on the other hand, it's just taking in everybody?
[Guest]: I'll go back to my earlier avatar as a political activist and not a journalist.
[Guest]: I think this is what politics is.
[Guest]: Day to day politics, especially in a country which is as diverse as India and as big as
[Guest]: India, it can never be adhering to a text cast in stone.
[Guest]: Politics in India always has to be about and it will be about handling contradictions.
[Guest]: So if the BJP can handle its contradictions in Goa, it'll have a field run.
[Guest]: The BJP could not handle its contradiction in Kashmir, so the government fell.
[Guest]: I think politicians, and this is where persons become important, because sometimes, you know,
[Guest]: it could depend on just one person.
[Guest]: So it took an Atal Bihari Vajpayee to run an NDA coalition for that.
[Guest]: I think if the BJP today had those kinds of numbers, nobody would do business with Narendra
[Guest]: Modi.
[Guest]: It is only because Narendra Modi has the majority that people know, JDU with all their reservations,
[Guest]: I don't know how they're going to vote on the triple talaq bill today, but they'll stay
[Guest]: with the NDA.
[Amit Varma]: So I think that is where the art of handling contradictions
[Guest]: becomes extremely important.
[Guest]: And that is where the rest of the opposition has absolutely no idea what to do.
[Guest]: I mean, look at Bihar, for example, now, I'm from JNU, so I have a bias.
[Guest]: So Kanhaiya went and contested Begusarai.
[Guest]: He actually came second, whereas the RJD candidate came third.
[Guest]: But Tejasvi Yadav, you know, he was in charge of things.
[Guest]: He could not even give that one Lok Sabha seat to Kanhaiya.
[Guest]: Look at the BJP.
[Guest]: I mean, it gave an equal number of seats to the Janata Dal United.
[Guest]: Now we all know that the BJP did not need to do that.
[Guest]: Look at what they've done to the Shiv Sena.
[Guest]: Amit Shah went to Uddhav Thackeray's house to sort of accommodate, placate Uddhav Thackeray.
[Guest]: No, no, you have to stay with us.
[Guest]: I think this is something, you know, you might think that the BJP leadership, you know, a
[Guest]: lot of people say that, you know, they are all fundamentalist and very, you know, sort
[Guest]: of predatory in nature, etc.
[Guest]: But I think behind this so-called strong face of the BJP leadership, which people like Narendra
[Guest]: Modi and Amit Shah sort of display, I think they also bring with them a lot of flexibility
[Guest]: in day-to-day politics, a lot of commitment to protect their core ideology, even while
[Guest]: doing all these compromises.
[Guest]: And a lot of the electoral success with the BJP has had in this country in the recent
[Guest]: past is also because of that.
[Guest]: It is not just ideology.
[Guest]: They are doing, you know, the BJP might oppose beef-eating in say, Uttar Pradesh or Bihar,
[Guest]: but they would go to the Northeast and say that you please go ahead, eat your beef, we
[Guest]: have absolutely no problems with you.
[Guest]: They are doing business with the Christians in Kerala.
[Guest]: They made a minister who comes from the Christian community in the state, they have absolutely
[Guest]: no problems with beef-eating.
[Guest]: So the BJP today is not only the most ideologically convinced party in this country, it is also
[Guest]: the most flexible and pragmatic party in the country when it comes to political praxis.
[Amit Varma]: So let's say it practices all this flexible politics as a means to an end, which is to
[Amit Varma]: come to power.
[Amit Varma]: But when it comes to power, its core supporters would expect it to carry, to do something
[Amit Varma]: about their ideology, whether it's Mandir Banao or Bank House Rotter or Build a Hindu
[Amit Varma]: Rashtra.
[Amit Varma]: So where do you sort of see it going?
[Amit Varma]: Like what is the future?
[Amit Varma]: Do you just keep the circle going where, you know, your means to an end is again, coming
[Amit Varma]: to power is an end in itself?
[Amit Varma]: Is that where it continues going?
[Amit Varma]: Or does it actually start acting upon some of this and we go in those without casting
[Amit Varma]: a value judgment on those directions, like, forget whether Hindu Rashtra is desirable
[Amit Varma]: or not, or whether we should build a temple or not.
[Guest]: But so there are two ways about it.
[Guest]: One is, you know, people who are more Christian than the Pope within the BJP ranks, if you
[Guest]: want to use that phrase, what do they do when the government doesn't deliver?
[Guest]: Now, they either have a choice of going and floating something which is, you know, even
[Guest]: to the right of say the BJP, or they have the choice of going and doing business with
[Guest]: the opposition.
[Guest]: So like I said, you know, the Babri Masjid, the farmer angry with the BJP example, I think
[Guest]: both of these cases happen.
[Guest]: So we have that farmer in Madhya Pradesh, who actually went and took part in demolishing
[Guest]: the Babri Mosque, but voted for the Congress.
[Guest]: We have somebody like a Praveen Togadia, who my generation has always associated as the
[Guest]: most rabid right wing political voice in the country, who actually has been who was trying
[Guest]: to criticize Modi and sort of cause some political damage, none of it happened.
[Amit Varma]: And back when Modi was CM of Gujarat, he had actually sidelined Togadia.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I think both of these trends will continue.
[Guest]: But what I think is how it works is a large part of that political spectrum, which actually
[Guest]: concurs with the worldview of the BJP today, also thinks that if this government were not
[Guest]: to be in power, they would actually be worse off.
[Guest]: So with all the reservations, which they might have, they actually think that it is in their
[Guest]: interest to sort of continue investing in this regime.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of move on from the BJP to the opposition.
[Amit Varma]: And you recently wrote a piece about how Rahul Gandhi's analysis of why they lost the elections
[Amit Varma]: is completely wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest]: So if one were to very crudely summarize Rahul Gandhi's letter, it basically meant that the
[Guest]: Congress should be doing more of what it was already doing.
[Guest]: I don't think that helps.
[Guest]: No, the biggest reason it doesn't help is because the Congress actually won those three
[Guest]: states, you know, in December 2018, and in less than six months, it ended up losing all
[Guest]: of them.
[Guest]: So it can't just be organization in my view, it can't be the case that your activists were
[Guest]: actually delivering six months ago, and today they can't.
[Guest]: The question is, what do you do about it?
[Guest]: I think one part of it is you have absolutely no idea how to build a constructive effective
[Guest]: critique of this government's economic limitations.
[Guest]: And there are many, I personally believe that.
[Guest]: So you actually do not know what to go and talk to whom.
[Guest]: The second thing is, I think the Congress and which is where I focus a large part of
[Guest]: my piece on is the Congress has no idea how to take care of this Hindu polarization business.
[Guest]: They actually want to be seen as Hindus, which reflects in the temple visits and whatnot
[Guest]: done by especially the two active politicians from the Gandhi family, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka
[Guest]: in these elections and before these elections, but they don't know how they should be doing
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Because like I argued in this piece, it is not enough for you if you want to counter
[Guest]: the BJP politically to be seen as pro-Hindu.
[Guest]: There would be moments in the campaign in before an election where the BJP would actually
[Guest]: portray itself as either explicitly or not so explicitly anti-Muslim.
[Guest]: So when you say you would implement NRC in the entire country, I mean, people understand
[Guest]: what you're hinting at.
[Guest]: You basically hinting at the fact that there are a lot of Bangladeshi Muslims in this country
[Guest]: who could actually be West Bengali Muslims and you would deport them.
[Guest]: He would never come to do around to doing that.
[Guest]: But this is something nobody in the opposition can go and champion.
[Guest]: When Narendra Modi goes to say Calcutta and says that Mamata Banerjee is preventing us
[Guest]: from implementing NRC here and she's Farooq Abdullah's ally who is preventing us from
[Guest]: abolishing Article 370 there, which basically helps terrorists, etc.
[Guest]: How does the opposition go and deal with this acquisition by the BJP?
[Guest]: Now can you go to an average villager in say Begusara in Bihar or Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh
[Guest]: and teach him or her what was the instrument of accession when Kashmir was being annexed
[Guest]: to our country?
[Guest]: What happens if article, no, or do you go to people around the country and show them
[Guest]: census data that this is what Bangladeshi infiltration is, this is what the number of
[Guest]: Bengali speakers in a lot of places is, doesn't work like that.
[Guest]: I think, and this is where, you know, cultural intervention becomes very important.
[Guest]: This day-to-day primacy of the unidirectional cultural discourse, which has happened in
[Guest]: our country, which the right wing, especially the, you know, which is sort of in concurrence
[Guest]: with the politics of the BJP has completely, I think, occupied.
[Guest]: How do you deal with it?
[Guest]: There's absolutely no, there's been no effort by the opposition to take it.
[Guest]: Now one part of it can be economic, you know, that actually, you know, religion is the opium
[Guest]: of the masses and you don't have the job.
[Guest]: So basically all this is being sent to, but I think in a country like India, you know,
[Guest]: so this is something Walter Anderson's book on the RSS when it was released, I was invited
[Guest]: to a discussion on the book where Professor Anderson himself was present.
[Guest]: So this is something I said there that actually, you know, a lot of intellectuals in India
[Guest]: criticize the RSS on the basis of the premise that RSS's worldview does not stand intellectual
[Guest]: scrutiny.
[Guest]: We have to understand that the RSS is not an intellectual institution.
[Guest]: It does not require intellectual scrutiny and sanctity to sort of propagate its ideas.
[Guest]: It is at the end of the day, a majoritarian religious body, which basically needs to consolidate
[Guest]: people from its old religion.
[Guest]: And I said, look at somebody like Mahatma Gandhi.
[Guest]: I mean, if you were to intellectually analyze Mahatma Gandhi, I mean, any rational intellectual
[Guest]: would find a 1000 problems with the kind of arguments, political praxis, behavior he indulged
[Guest]: in, right from his Gram Swaraj to many other things.
[Guest]: But he was the biggest mass leader in our country.
[Guest]: So politics and rationality are two sets where there is a significant union, but not all
[Guest]: of it is common.
[Guest]: I think the opposition, especially the Congress Party needs to figure out how do you deal
[Guest]: with this, you know, dog whistling, if one could use the term against Muslims in day
[Guest]: to day politics by the BJP, especially during elections, what do you do about it?
[Guest]: Unless they have an answer to this question, which I'm pretty sure they do not have because
[Guest]: the only thing they could figure out was going to temples, they are going to have a very
[Amit Varma]: difficult time in dealing with the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: And what you just said a couple of thoughts strike me about the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: One is that if you go back to the history of the Congress, you'll find that pre independence
[Amit Varma]: and even for a few years after independence, a Congress within it had genuine Hindu nationalist
[Amit Varma]: leaders of nature.
[Amit Varma]: Madan Mohan Malviya founded Banaras Hindu University.
[Amit Varma]: And at the time, you know, you had at the time of independence, Sardar Patel was there,
[Amit Varma]: Govind Vallabh Pant was the CM of UP, Lal Bahadur Shastri was a Home Minister of UP.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, both of them were in charge when the Ram Idol was installed in Ayodhya.
[Amit Varma]: And I think 49 and Nehru said remove it and they obfuscated and they denied it.
[Amit Varma]: So you had these Hindu nationalist leaders whom Hindus could take seriously.
[Amit Varma]: Today, there are no leaders like that within the Congress for good or for bad and all of
[Amit Varma]: what they do like Rahul Gandhi going to Kedarnath is frankly just very obvious posturing.
[Amit Varma]: You can only sort of just laugh at that.
[Amit Varma]: And I totally agree with what you also earlier said about how you cannot hug back to the
[Amit Varma]: politics like one point that I keep making about the Congress and the BJP, the contrast
[Amit Varma]: between them and this is actually a criticism of both in a sense, is that the Congress behaves
[Amit Varma]: as if history began in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: So they will constantly talk about all that has gone wrong since 2014 and a lot has so
[Amit Varma]: all of that criticism is completely valid.
[Amit Varma]: But they will ignore their own sins of the past.
[Amit Varma]: And they will ignore that voters have turned to Modi and rejected them because of the misgovernance
[Amit Varma]: of decades and you know, not only will they not engage with that, they will promise the
[Amit Varma]: same kind of policies and the same kind of visions for the future, which has already
[Amit Varma]: and correctly, in my view, been rejected by the nation.
[Amit Varma]: And the BJP is a converse of that where they behave as if history ended at 2014.
[Amit Varma]: So what Modi did in the last five years is irrelevant.
[Guest]: Everything is Nehru's fault.
[Guest]: No, I would actually you know, I was like, I think it is a Congress which believes that
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: I think that the Congress actually thinks that we are still not in 2014.
[Guest]: Okay, we haven't.
[Guest]: They have a sense of political entitlement, which I think makes them think that the Congress
[Guest]: still should be the default choice of the people in this country.
[Guest]: Now, 14, there was a question whether it was a one off thing or not.
[Guest]: But I think between 14 and 19, now we know that that is not going to be the case.
[Guest]: So the Congress Party has to realize that and if the Congress Party actually wants to
[Guest]: regain its stature as the default political choice of the people in our country, it has
[Guest]: to completely reinvent not just its organization, but also its politics.
[Guest]: So there was a phase in Indian politics which lasted, you know, one could say from Nehru
[Guest]: till the emergency was one phase, then post emergency was a very turbulent phase.
[Guest]: Then we had this relative degree of stability, I think post 14, we have entered into a completely
[Amit Varma]: new phase, the Congress has to realize that.
[Amit Varma]: And is there a way out of it for them?
[Amit Varma]: Both in terms of realistically, is there a way out of it given what the organization
[Amit Varma]: is today, and and the near feudal capture and the erosion of the organization itself?
[Amit Varma]: And also that if they is there a way out of it?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a potential hypothetical way out of it just in terms of narrative?
[Amit Varma]: Because the question that you yourself asked, how do you counter this dominant narrative?
[Amit Varma]: It's obviously not by you know, going harking back to the past, but then how?
[Guest]: I think it's a two step problem.
[Guest]: Now, let us go back to the example of Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: Narendra Modi comes from an extremely ordinary family in this country.
[Guest]: The kind of political choices he made when he made them to become a swamsevak, I mean,
[Guest]: despite being married, not have a family life, etc.
[Guest]: I think even in his wildest dreams, he would never have imagined that he would end up being
[Guest]: where he is today.
[Guest]: You have to give it to him.
[Guest]: Let us come back to the Congress now.
[Guest]: An average Congress person, you know, who's entrained in the leadership, say, if we were
[Guest]: to look at top 20,000 people in the Congress organization in this country, if they were
[Guest]: asked to explain, why is it politically that they are with the Congress Party?
[Guest]: And if you were to exclude say religious minorities in our country, because they have a vested
[Guest]: interest in promoting a political force, which is by and large secular in its outlook.
[Guest]: Now, the Congress has made those compromises with secularism, but we know that they are
[Guest]: programmatically completely different from what the BJP is.
[Guest]: If you were to ask those 10,000 people who come from the majority religious community
[Guest]: Hindus in this country, why are you in the Congress Party?
[Guest]: I think all of them would struggle very hard to come up with a coherent answer.
[Guest]: That would not be the case.
[Guest]: I would not say it so much about the BJP, but at least with the RSS in this country.
[Guest]: I mean, you might disagree with their worldview or agree with it, but they will tell you exactly
[Guest]: why they are in the RSS and why they would be in the RSS, why they would sort of get
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: So that is the basic problem.
[Guest]: I think, I mean, you have to have, now there is that material basis, if you want to enter
[Guest]: into politics, you do some real estate, you get some more money here.
[Guest]: That is how we know local politics, that is how it operates in the entire country today.
[Guest]: The scale might differ depending on how developed your capitalism is.
[Guest]: But the subjective question regarding politics, I think, and this is a crisis not just of
[Guest]: the Congress, but also of the left today in our country.
[Guest]: I mean, if you were to go to JNU, recruit somebody, say, you know, become a part of
[Guest]: the SFI.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: I mean, there's not going to be a revolution.
[Guest]: I don't think any communist leader in this country believes that there's going to be
[Guest]: a revolution in the world.
[Guest]: I mean, you used to have a government in West Bengal, which notwithstanding all its problems
[Guest]: had a very glorious track record in terms of basic land distribution, etc.
[Guest]: That doesn't hold today.
[Guest]: So why should I join the left?
[Guest]: I mean, in your party program, you still say that North Korea is a socialist country, you
[Guest]: still say that China is a socialist country today, you know, despite of all the problems
[Guest]: which are happening in Venezuela, and I think Chavez did some good things and certain things
[Guest]: have came back to bite the regime.
[Guest]: But you if you continue to celebrate those things, then where do you draw the moral grandstanding
[Guest]: from to be able to attract bright intellectual people into your folds, who would then be
[Guest]: willing to make a certain amount of individual sacrifice to sort of further your political
[Guest]: cause because Narendra Modi made a certain amount of political sacrifice very early in
[Guest]: his political career.
[Guest]: Amit Shah comes from a very wealthy businessman family.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, we might have a lot of disagreements with him, but he made a certain
[Guest]: amount of political sacrifice to give time and resources to the BJP.
[Guest]: And that was the case the entire generation, the socialist leadership of this country from
[Guest]: Nitish Kumar to Lalu Yadav to everybody else, all of them made political sacrifices during
[Guest]: the anti-emergency struggle, they were put in jail, they faced a lot of state atrocity.
[Guest]: Now, all of those acts, I do not think can be, you know, a product of purely Machiavellian
[Guest]: consideration that I have to do well in politics, hence I have to do that.
[Guest]: I don't think that is the case.
[Guest]: So there was a degree of romanticism, subjectivism, etc.
[Guest]: As far as the larger thing is concerned, and this is far more difficult here, because a
[Guest]: with no liberalization, etc.
[Guest]: People who study in elite institutions, I think people like us have a lot more opportunities
[Guest]: in front of us than what people in the 70s or 80s had.
[Guest]: I mean, if you are really, you know, bright, you have the world to conquer, right from
[Guest]: here to the United States to everywhere.
[Guest]: Two, I mean, because there's so much, you know, for example, you know, somebody in Delhi
[Guest]: who goes to a private school today, a group private school goes to a good public or say,
[Guest]: you know, went to Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, you went to Ashoka University, you came back
[Guest]: with a PhD, you would have absolutely no idea of what the common people think in this country
[Guest]: because you've never engaged with them.
[Guest]: So the kind of class ghettoization, which is, you know, being imposed, even if inadvertently
[Guest]: on you, I mean, how do you build a connect with the masses, I think these are very serious
[Guest]: sociological economic questions, which people from the opposition, I think.
[Guest]: So when Narendra Modi makes that critique about Rahul Gandhi of him being entitled part
[Guest]: of it is true.
[Guest]: I mean, it is not it is it is purely an accident of birth and Rahul Gandhi is not to blame
[Guest]: for it.
[Guest]: But the kind of India Rahul Gandhi or Narendra Modi would have seen are very different.
[Guest]: Now Rahul Gandhi tried bringing those kind of people in the organization.
[Guest]: But I think unless you have a subjective factor, unless you have a robust critique of you know,
[Guest]: what the BJP stands for as a Hindu party, if you can offer a better alternative to that,
[Guest]: I think it will be very difficult to build an alternative going on from here, either
[Guest]: for the Congress or anybody else.
[Amit Varma]: Quick note for my listeners, he mentioned Venezuela, I did have an episode on Venezuela
[Amit Varma]: as well, which will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Would it be fair to sum up your point by saying that the point that you're making is that
[Amit Varma]: if you look at Narendra Modi's trajectory, he is here today because he joined a party,
[Amit Varma]: a political party, which wasn't doing so well at the time.
[Amit Varma]: So he didn't join it for the lust for power, but because of a deep ideological belief with
[Amit Varma]: whatever the core vision of the party was, and that drove him and many others like him.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you see the one person who got to the top to actually form the backbone
[Amit Varma]: of the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: And if someone joins the Congress or the left now, what is that vision which is being sold
[Amit Varma]: at one point of time, that vision used to be there.
[Amit Varma]: No, and you know what you said about Rahul Gandhi and the entitlement and you know, the
[Amit Varma]: class barrier also reminds me of, you know, Mahua Mitra, who's very much the flavor of
[Amit Varma]: the town right now gave a recent interview where she said she was once in the Congress,
[Amit Varma]: as you know, in the youth wing or such like, and she was there for some time.
[Amit Varma]: And then she left and she she left because a there was sexism, she wasn't being taken
[Amit Varma]: seriously because she was a woman be she found that even regardless of gender, there was
[Amit Varma]: a ceiling and you needed to be to have some political backing to get ahead of it.
[Amit Varma]: And in a party like that, which suffers from that kind of feudal mindset, you're really
[Amit Varma]: not going to rise up the ranks and someone like a Narendra Modi from an OBC background
[Amit Varma]: and you know, from the kind of poor background where he came isn't going to rise up a party
[Amit Varma]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's that's sort of something that
[Guest]: Congress is not the only such party, a lot of these regional parties, including Mitra's
[Guest]: own party, we know that it is not run on what exactly can be termed as democratic principles.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So I did not go into these details, because we are talking about larger issues.
[Guest]: So if you want to take BJP's ideology head on, you have to have an ideological affinity
[Guest]: for your own political project, which can't be ridiculing everything which is Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: It can't just be opposition.
[Amit Varma]: You can't stand for something, you can't put off people.
[Guest]: I mean, this is something the opposition doesn't understand.
[Guest]: I mean, just because you do not like Narendra Modi, you cannot ridicule that he's going
[Guest]: to be on this discovery show.
[Guest]: It doesn't help your political cause, let me be as blunt as that.
[Guest]: The pro-BJP people actually enjoy those things.
[Guest]: You have to have a more substantive, material, effective critique.
[Amit Varma]: And also just because someone is pro-BJP doesn't mean that he can't stick to those sort of
[Amit Varma]: beliefs which make him pro-BJP but still find a reason to support you.
[Amit Varma]: For example, so I'm just throwing a thought at you, tell me what you think.
[Amit Varma]: I think that you can't categorize people very simply.
[Amit Varma]: We all contain multitudes and there might be an individual who is a believing Hindu
[Amit Varma]: and who believes in the BJP project.
[Amit Varma]: But he might also have liberal instincts and he believes in free speech and he might also
[Amit Varma]: believe in free markets or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: We are a bundle of impulses and what the BJP political project has very successfully done
[Amit Varma]: is appeal to one aspect of their belief systems.
[Amit Varma]: And for that reason, they support BJP.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, it is still nevertheless, I would believe possible for other parties to
[Amit Varma]: appeal to other aspects of their beliefs and whatever, you know, very complex multifaceted
[Amit Varma]: worldviews are and draw some of that support away.
[Amit Varma]: Now given that a lot of the work that you do, which deals with data is like any political
[Amit Varma]: data is also in its nature, I would guess social data.
[Guest]: What would your thoughts be on this observation?
[Guest]: You're exactly right.
[Guest]: This was in 2016, I guess, CSDS Lokniti, which is among the few credible political research
[Guest]: institutes in our country, they did a survey of youth.
[Guest]: So they had this questionnaire, they went along to everybody.
[Guest]: One of the questions in the questionnaire was which political party do you support?
[Guest]: There were a host of other questions, you know, ranging from do you support eating beef
[Guest]: to you know, whether somebody who consumes alcohol should be your neighbor, etc, etc.
[Guest]: When we ran cross task, what it shows was that apart from the question of eating beef,
[Guest]: there was by and large complete political concurrence among supporters of different political
[Guest]: parties, whether you supported the BJP or the Congress or anybody else, there was absolutely
[Guest]: no difference.
[Guest]: So your sociological beliefs, you know, your behavioral beliefs, I think are more or less
[Guest]: shaped by your socialization rather than anything else, rather than which political party do
[Guest]: you support.
[Guest]: If you were to go to say, South Bombay, and if you were to go to Gaya, the place I come
[Guest]: from, I mean, what is acceptable socially and what is not acceptable socially would
[Guest]: probably be very different.
[Guest]: And you cannot brand the person living in say, South Bombay or Gaya and be that as may
[Guest]: in either cases, as being prejudiced or biased, or I think social change has to be something
[Guest]: which you consistently strive for, which is where no, I think, you know, take lynchings,
[Guest]: for example, what is the by and by now the established liberal reaction to lynchings?
[Guest]: Something happens, I think both you and I agree that it is completely unfortunate.
[Guest]: Then you have a protest here in Delhi, etc.
[Guest]: Where is the preemptive political effort to prevent such things from happening?
[Guest]: Has the opposition done a campaign?
[Guest]: Now, some people like Harsh Mandar, etc, have tried to do it, but they are individuals.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, you can't have that kind of an impact.
[Guest]: If you want to prevent a religious polarization in this country, where is the preemptive political
[Guest]: effort to do that?
[Guest]: I mean, it is extremely convenient for a bunch of political actors to come out everything
[Guest]: ex post after say this thing has happened, where's the ex ante effort?
[Guest]: I don't see that.
[Guest]: Then how can you go and say that, you know, people people are becoming bigger, they don't
[Guest]: listen to us.
[Guest]: I think that's that's intellectual and political lethargy.
[Amit Varma]: So we've spoken about the BJP, we've spoken about the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: Let's speak about the left because you've been a man of the left yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure what has happened over the last few years must pain you, though it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: pain me, but I'm sure it must pain you.
[Amit Varma]: Is the left dead?
[Amit Varma]: What did they do wrong?
[Guest]: What happened?
[Guest]: The political left as we knew it, I see it very difficult that it will revive.
[Guest]: I don't think that's going to happen.
[Guest]: Now, has it all happened in the same way?
[Guest]: No, let us take the Bengal and Kerala examples, the two states where left was actually very
[Guest]: strong.
[Guest]: The Bengal thing, I think is a classic case of complete ideological disarray, because
[Guest]: you ultimately ended up I mean, I think there's been a lot of serious academic work, there
[Guest]: were a lot of problems with, you know, the left front government when it was in power.
[Guest]: If you look at the social indicators, etc, Dwaipayan Bhattacharya, who is a professor
[Guest]: of political science in JNU has written a very good book, you know, it's, it's called
[Guest]: governance as practice, how left got consumed in its own contradictions, gives a very powerful
[Guest]: account of what happened.
[Guest]: But ultimately, you basically lost power on the question of acquiring land for a handful
[Guest]: of corporates.
[Guest]: Now, that's the worst way in which a communist party would like to lose power.
[Guest]: Let's go to Kerala now.
[Guest]: I think Pinarayi Vijayan's government and the CPIM and the LDF there took a very principled
[Guest]: position when it came to the question of Sabarimala.
[Guest]: They were the only political actors in the state, the Congress and the BJP both sort
[Guest]: of decided against doing it, who stood for the Supreme Court judgment that women of menstruating
[Guest]: age should be allowed to enter the holy shrine.
[Guest]: I think this electoral loss is a political price for doing that.
[Guest]: Now they have lost from a politically very principled, this is something I think even
[Guest]: you would agree with.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: But in Tripura, it took a completely different turn.
[Guest]: I think somewhere between the Bengali and the tribal contradiction, they lost the plot
[Guest]: and ended up losing a large amount of tribal vote.
[Guest]: And once they lost power, it has all led to a meltdown.
[Guest]: So if one were to talk about the electoral decline of the left, I think one has to take
[Guest]: a heterogeneous view, because each stronghold, how the left lost it, I'm not so sure whether
[Guest]: they come back in Kerala or not.
[Guest]: But let us for a moment assume that there are all different factors.
[Guest]: But the larger factor and a lot of, you know, political leaders in the left like to say,
[Guest]: but that why should these states be held accountable for the decline of the left?
[Guest]: What about the rest of the country?
[Guest]: Why did the rest of the party say not support the Bengal party or the Kerala party?
[Guest]: That is where the ideological question I think becomes extremely important.
[Guest]: That what is it you want to mobilize people on?
[Guest]: Now let us look at some progressive legislations which happened during the UPF 1.
[Guest]: The left played a role in all of them, Rural Employment Guarantee, Right to Information,
[Guest]: Forest Rights Act.
[Guest]: I think the left had not been supporting the UPF government, these legislations probably
[Guest]: would never have seen the light of the day.
[Guest]: Interestingly, the left did not start the agitations for demanding these agitations.
[Guest]: Employment Guarantee started from the Right to Food Campaign.
[Guest]: Right to Information was Aruna Roy, Arvind Kejriwal, a lot of these other people.
[Guest]: Forest Rights Act bill was a lot of tribal organizations, I mean, there were some left
[Guest]: leaning organizations also.
[Guest]: So even these little successes against the Indian state, which you think actually democratize
[Guest]: the state further, tilt the balance if one could say so in favor of the extremely marginalized.
[Guest]: Now, these are extremely marginalized sections of the society.
[Guest]: The left did not take an initiative on its own.
[Guest]: Where is the left really strong today, despite all its political setbacks?
[Guest]: Bank unions, insurance unions, these are the ones, you know, if the public sector bank
[Guest]: unions decide, which are still dominated by the left, they'll bring the banking industry
[Guest]: to a complete standstill in our country, handful of universities, students unions, etc.
[Guest]: So you actually have a situation where your remaining political capital rests with people
[Guest]: who are fast becoming marginalized in their own way.
[Guest]: We know that public sector banking is not going to be the future of banking in this
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: Whether the government privatizes banks or not is a different debate.
[Guest]: But 20 years from now, public sector banks would not be what they are today.
[Guest]: So between these two extremes, you know, this is something the left exploited early in its
[Guest]: career, etc.
[Guest]: I mean, it had a lot of ideology, you know, Jyoti Basu was a lawyer educated in England,
[Guest]: he came back and did that politics.
[Guest]: So I mean, we spoke about Narendra Modi, who comes from a very modest family, had very
[Guest]: little education, and was not successfully professionally otherwise, but became a political
[Guest]: old timer.
[Guest]: Now, here is the other extreme Jyoti Basu, who comes from England is educated in England
[Guest]: could have no and all the money in his life, decides to work for a communist party.
[Guest]: So there was also the other side of the political infatuation, affinity, whatever one might
[Guest]: choose to call it, it actually, the Bombay film industry at one point of time, today
[Guest]: people rave and rant about Akshay Kumar supporting Narendra Modi, etc.
[Guest]: I mean, the Communist Party actually had its headquarters in Bombay, the entire Indian
[Guest]: People's Theatre Association, the galaxy of film stars used to work for the left.
[Guest]: So how do you regain that ideological, I think, and I can say this with a lot of confidence
[Guest]: for the left without a larger ideological narrative, left politics cannot have any future
[Guest]: in any society.
[Guest]: I mean, your your basic justification for your politics, even today comes from the fact
[Guest]: that there is a established school of analysis in social sciences, which was founded by Marx,
[Guest]: which has been improved upon by a lot of thinkers, because left politics, by definition is a
[Guest]: scientific way of politics.
[Guest]: And that is what the left likes to claim it is people might have disagreements with it.
[Guest]: So even if you disagree with the left, you say that the basic problem is in the theory,
[Guest]: I mean, it is not that people do it wrong.
[Guest]: So the left has to think about going back to the drawing board on that.
[Guest]: Now, where do you get your people?
[Guest]: You don't have factories, you can't have trade unions, farmer politics, etc.
[Guest]: You today, even if you were to say that I want to do land reforms, no farmer would come
[Guest]: to you a land has become hopelessly fragmented, be nobody wants to be in farming.
[Guest]: So where do you draw your ranks from?
[Guest]: I think is a very important question.
[Guest]: This is a question which is not very easy to answer.
[Guest]: But the existing leadership of the left, I don't think has even made an attempt to answer
[Amit Varma]: that question.
[Amit Varma]: And what strikes me and obviously, I don't know the left as deeply as you do.
[Amit Varma]: So feel free to sort of tell me if you disagree.
[Amit Varma]: But what also strikes me is that these sort of theoretical debates that you speak of are
[Amit Varma]: something that might be happening in academic circles, but how does a common man think of
[Amit Varma]: the left?
[Amit Varma]: And why has the left gained traction wherever it has with the common man?
[Amit Varma]: And the reason partly is, of course, a reaction against an oppressive state.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from that, a certain sort of pro poor rhetoric that you know, the rich are
[Amit Varma]: exploiting you and will, you know, redistribute their wealth a little bit and will make society
[Amit Varma]: more equal.
[Amit Varma]: But what seems to have happened in recent times is that that narrative has been co opted
[Amit Varma]: by the BJP, like you mentioned the NREGA.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the multiple factors, which I have read about from reporters, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I think Parth MN reported on this extensively before the elections, is that a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: seem to have voted for the BJP because of the social welfare schemes, because of the
[Amit Varma]: delivery, the last minute delivery of the social welfare schemes, sometimes when they
[Amit Varma]: benefited themselves, and sometimes when they saw others benefiting and said, hey, maybe
[Amit Varma]: I can also benefit in future.
[Amit Varma]: So that whole pro poor populist narrative has, seems to me to have been co opted by
[Amit Varma]: the BJP, which then then you wondered at what space in the popular imagination, forget the
[Amit Varma]: theory, what space in the popular imagination can the left possibly occupy now?
[Guest]: Well, that's one way to look at it.
[Guest]: But let me pose a counter question, let us say the people voted for the BJP because they
[Guest]: got toilets and houses, Swachh Bharat and this Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, perfectly
[Guest]: all right for people to vote for the BJP in one election.
[Guest]: Is that going to be enough for them to vote for the BJP again, because politics the beauty
[Guest]: of it is it's it's, it's an infinite process, it's not a one off thing.
[Guest]: Now will Narendra Modi give them another toilet and another house?
[Guest]: Probably not.
[Guest]: Because there's a limit to the amount of welfarism even this government can do, I mean, you don't
[Guest]: have those kinds of resources.
[Guest]: So, you know, the question is, you know, can you mobilize people who were given say a one
[Guest]: time asset transfer by a government to demand something more?
[Guest]: If a political party were to start a movement in this country today, that we don't just
[Guest]: need schools in our country, we need better schools.
[Guest]: There's a lot of talk about this learning outcomes, we need learning outcomes to improve,
[Guest]: no, because children when even when they get out of school after class 10th or 12th, they
[Guest]: can't speak, they can't write, this is something we directly affects your employability.
[Guest]: I mean, even if you want to, you know, work as an assistant at a grocery shop, the shopkeeper
[Guest]: would expect that you probably do the basic maths and a lot of people find that very difficult
[Amit Varma]: in our country.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a small part of the jobs crisis is also the disconnect between the jobs and education.
[Guest]: It's a large part of the job crisis.
[Guest]: I mean, you might have an MPhil degree, but so what I mean, how do you make yourself employable?
[Guest]: What are you good for?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Especially in provincial universities, things are really bad.
[Guest]: syllabi have not been revised for 30-40 years.
[Guest]: Most of them work with my father teaches in a college in Gaya, so I know, I mean, he has
[Guest]: to take care of 1000 students with the strength of three teachers.
[Guest]: So I mean, you can't teach it's humanly not possible, you go nuts if you try to do that.
[Guest]: So if a political party were to take that thing, mobilize the youth, I think it could
[Guest]: lead to results.
[Guest]: And if the government know to prevent the opposition from winning does it, then that's
[Guest]: the best case scenario.
[Guest]: I mean, then you've completely sort of radically transformed your education system, which would
[Guest]: make you use your demographic dividend in a better way.
[Guest]: I think one of the biggest reasons for the problem, whether it is a left etc, is that
[Guest]: the people who are at the top, who are making decisions of what needs to be done, what doesn't
[Guest]: need to be done, have absolutely no connect with the, yeah, let me be harsh.
[Guest]: I think the left leadership in this country is a bunch of bureaucrats awaiting retirement.
[Amit Varma]: It's very interesting that the political marketplace has transformed itself.
[Amit Varma]: Many existing players haven't been able to adapt, like the Congress and the left.
[Amit Varma]: However, there is a space for new entrepreneurs and this is demonstrated by the example you
[Amit Varma]: gave earlier of the Aam Aadmi Party in Delhi, where they came up and they found an issue
[Amit Varma]: like corruption, and they took it and they made a space for themselves within the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: Whether you agree with them or not is a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: It's a it's a triumph of political entrepreneurship.
[Amit Varma]: And like you pointed out, maybe education is another wedge factor or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: This is up to political entrepreneurs to figure out what sort of narratives they can find
[Amit Varma]: and which which brings me to my next question, which is the politics of identity, or the
[Amit Varma]: politics of Mandal as it were, which, you know, received a big Philip around 18991,
[Amit Varma]: you know, those years.
[Amit Varma]: And there was sort of the consensus view of Indian politics was that it is essentially
[Amit Varma]: a politics of identity.
[Amit Varma]: Even when the 2014 win of the BJP was being analyzed, it was okay, these are the different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of caste coalitions you made, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And now there is a counter view coming up saying that that has changed completely.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of these smaller identities have been subsumed within this larger Hindu identity.
[Amit Varma]: And that is a triumph of Modi and Shah.
[Amit Varma]: What's your sense of this?
[Guest]: I am not so sure.
[Guest]: There is definitely an element of Hindutva in the BJP's political success today is true.
[Guest]: They should dispute that.
[Guest]: Does it mean that the caste identities do not matter?
[Guest]: I do not think so.
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of thought goes in ticket distribution, we know for a fact, you know, even for the
[Guest]: BJP, caste equations are paramount for them.
[Guest]: Look at Karnataka, for example.
[Guest]: I mean, Yadurappa has become the chief minister, he's a Lingayat leader, he's not a Hindu leader
[Guest]: in Karnataka.
[Guest]: I mean, that is the core identity with the BJP thrives on politically in the state.
[Guest]: But the Hindu consolidation, we also have to understand how it has been achieved.
[Guest]: I think, you know, the othering of Muslims is just one part of it.
[Guest]: But in places like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, it has also been achieved against the erstwhile
[Guest]: dominant Yadavs, Jatavs, etc.
[Guest]: So that is also a very integral part of the Hindu consolidation.
[Guest]: So the BJP is still at around 35% of the vote, it is not the case that they've reached 60-65%
[Guest]: of the vote.
[Guest]: I think, and this varies a lot across states, there is a lot of social tension in the BJP's
[Guest]: ranks regarding the caste thing also.
[Guest]: All of us saw how the BJP struggled to balance caste equations.
[Guest]: So when the Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh defeats came, it was said that there was a
[Guest]: lot of pent up anger among the upper caste about how the BJP, you know, nullified the
[Guest]: Supreme Court's amendments to the SCST Prevention of Atrocities Act, that there was a feeling
[Guest]: that the BJP was being pro-Dalit, which who were victimizing upper caste, was the claim.
[Guest]: I'm not saying true or false.
[Guest]: What did the BJP do?
[Guest]: The BJP brought reservation for economically weaker sections from upper caste who had never
[Guest]: had reservations.
[Guest]: This is a complete game changer as far as social justice politics is considered in this
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: The BJP does not stop here.
[Guest]: Then what did it do?
[Guest]: Then another case came in the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: This was about implementing reservations in higher educational institutions.
[Guest]: So the question was whether you implement reservations at the level of a department
[Guest]: or do you implement reservations at the level of the institution?
[Guest]: If you did so at the level of the department, the number of effective seats would be very
[Guest]: high.
[Guest]: There, the BJP government actually once again nullified the Supreme Court order, but in
[Guest]: favor of the socially deprived caste, it was a completely anti-upper caste thing.
[Guest]: So it is doing a lot of flip flop between both camps and trying to keep both the camps
[Guest]: happy.
[Guest]: OBCs, now we have the talks of an OBC reorganization commission, there is talk that three categories
[Guest]: within the 27% OBC reservation would be made where the communities which have benefited
[Guest]: the most from OBC reservation would only have 7% instead of 27%.
[Guest]: The BJP, I think, is doing a lot of experimentation with the identity politics in our country.
[Guest]: The Congress also tried that.
[Guest]: They tried to make Lingayats a religion in the Karnataka election, it completely backfired
[Guest]: on them.
[Guest]: The BJP before the elections in Maharashtra now has given Maratha reservation.
[Guest]: Effective reservation probably has gone to some 70%, which is absurd in my personal view,
[Guest]: but nevertheless, I mean, BJP doesn't mean meh.
[Guest]: So I think identity continues to be a very significant part of it.
[Guest]: But I also think that for an anti-BJP force to just bank on identity and counter the BJP
[Guest]: has become extremely difficult, because there's a historical legacy to it.
[Guest]: So if you get just the Yadavs and the Muslims, everybody else will unite against you in Bihar.
[Guest]: So you basically get 30% of the vote, you don't get any seats, the opposition gets 56%,
[Guest]: the NDA gets 56%, walks away with everything.
[Guest]: So it only works for the BJP in today's age, identity doesn't work for the other camp.
[Amit Varma]: But there must be like, if it is true that the politics of identity still matters, and
[Amit Varma]: it is also true that at some point, there will be limits to how much you can gain with
[Amit Varma]: patronage and some of these coalitions are bound to be uneasy coalitions and fissures
[Amit Varma]: will develop and then there is possibly hope for the others there.
[Guest]: Well, let's see, for example, Goa is a very interesting case, you talked about it earlier.
[Guest]: So this, these MLAs from Congress resigned and went, the BJP actually dumped an existing
[Guest]: ally of it sort of their ministers were removed from the cabinet, and they are feeling completely
[Guest]: betrayed.
[Guest]: So I'm sure there's some identity at play, I think a part of these MLAs were defected
[Guest]: are Christians or something.
[Guest]: So we'll have to see how it goes about.
[Guest]: But like I said, what is important is these things could work at the state level, they
[Guest]: could work in a Madhya Pradesh or a Rajasthan or a Chhattisgarh.
[Guest]: But I think when it comes to national elections, the political appeal with Narendra Modi has
[Guest]: today, and that I don't think is based on identity that is based on a very larger macro
[Guest]: macho outlook of a national leader, who is not afraid to sort of strike at the enemy,
[Guest]: who has taken India's prestige to completely new levels, etc.
[Guest]: You cannot use identity to puncture those achievements.
[Amit Varma]: So I've taken a lot of your time, we are almost reaching two hours.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to end with sort of asking a question that asks you for a subjective assessment
[Amit Varma]: based on objective data, which is, you know, you study data all the time.
[Amit Varma]: For many years, you've been doing that you can see different trends within this country's
[Amit Varma]: social trends, political trends, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: If I ask you to indulge me for a moment and go 10 years ahead, 10 years forward in time
[Amit Varma]: to 2029, what do you think is a best case scenario and a worst case scenario for the
[Amit Varma]: Indian political landscape and therefore for India?
[Guest]: I mean, it's, it's, let's come to the worst case scenario, that's easy, easier to envisage.
[Guest]: I think climate change would play havoc with agricultural production in the country.
[Guest]: And a lot of farmers who are already you know, struggling very hard to make ends meet would
[Guest]: have a very difficult time, you know, agriculture would become very difficult and financially
[Guest]: unrewarding in large parts of the country.
[Guest]: Food security is something we've learned to take for granted in a country for a very long
[Guest]: time now.
[Guest]: I'm afraid that will not be the case 20 years from now.
[Guest]: This I think more than anything else is what really scares me.
[Guest]: You've also written about the water crisis recently.
[Guest]: The way you know, from Punjab, Haryana, which is the which are the traditional green revolution
[Guest]: states to states such as Bihar, arsenic poisoning is a huge problem in Bihar now.
[Guest]: I mean, Nitish Kumar has, you know, he's started a scheme which promises tap water to every
[Guest]: household in a village, but basically that tap water comes from a submersible pump in
[Guest]: said in the village.
[Guest]: So it's not some natural water supply.
[Guest]: That I think is the worst case scenario.
[Guest]: The best case scenario I think would be the kind of political competition the BJP has
[Guest]: brought into politics in this country.
[Guest]: I think the old ossified establishments of politics, a lot of which, like you said, were
[Guest]: based on patronage, identity, etc.
[Guest]: I think will not remain.
[Guest]: So even, you know, the Western interests which have thrived on those old establishments sooner
[Guest]: than later will lose their hold.
[Guest]: So there would be a genuine, I think, democratic upsurge to build a constructive opposition.
[Guest]: And when I say this, I'm keeping my personal biases out.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that this is right or the other is right.
[Guest]: It could take any shape, any ideological inclination, etc.
[Guest]: But there would be an effort to engage with the government.
[Guest]: Not on what the today's opposition, not on terms on what the today's opposition thinks
[Guest]: they should be.
[Guest]: So there would be a large, because the kind of a young country we are, and the kind of
[Guest]: problems our young generation faces, essentially jobs, employment, etc.
[Guest]: Even people like us, professionally white collared otherwise, there's absolutely no
[Guest]: job security.
[Guest]: Now, India is a country where you have absolutely no social security, you know, you might be
[Guest]: rich enough, you might have a medical insurance.
[Guest]: But if you encounter serious illness, there's a lot of problem.
[Guest]: So there has to be some sort of occupational solidarity among the young, at least, which
[Guest]: will hopefully give a progressive tilt, you know, in terms of at least the economic policy
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: It has to be more egalitarian, we have to take care of development should not just be
[Guest]: more roads and more flyovers and more airports, but it has to, it will have to hopefully take
[Guest]: into account health and education is something which has not been done till now.
[Amit Varma]: But that I think, you know, is the best case scenario we should all be hoping for.
[Amit Varma]: On that hopeful note, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I learned a lot from talking to you today.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's a saving grace of our democracy that we have journalists like you around.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It was a pleasure talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, then you can follow Roshan on Twitter at RoshanJNU,
[Amit Varma]: one word RoshanJNU.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Hello, everyone, welcome to Tech Careers in the New, the new podcast series presented
[Unknown]: by Accenture.
[Unknown]: I'm your host, Shiladitya Mukhopadhyay.
[Unknown]: In this podcast series, we'll get you the latest and greatest in the world of technology
[Unknown]: that's shaping the future of business as we know it.
[Unknown]: We're talking intelligent platforms, cloud, AI, blockchain, extended reality, and a whole
[Unknown]: lot more.
[Unknown]: Every fortnight on Wednesdays, we'll have for you a hot topic with expert speakers from
[Unknown]: Accenture talking about top trends in the space, how these are changing the world and
[Unknown]: creating growth across industries.
[Unknown]: And importantly, we'll tell you how you can learn more, build your skills and expertise
[Unknown]: to grow and stay relevant in your career.
[Unknown]: Episodes out on the IVM podcast app or wherever you get your podcast from.
[Unknown]: This is the amazing story of something awesome.
[Unknown]: Once Chuck decided to start a podcast, and so he did.
[Unknown]: The end.
[Unknown]: Okay, that was a crappy story.
[Unknown]: But I've got some really cool stories over at my new show, the origin of things.
[Unknown]: On this podcast, I look at the stories of how brands came into being, and sometimes
[Unknown]: evolved out of quite unexpected circumstances.
[Unknown]: And to make it really fun, I revealed the name of the brand and sometimes a category
[Unknown]: only at the very end.
[Unknown]: The show is five to seven minutes per episode and perfect for trivia junkies and brand nerds,
[Unknown]: especially those with short attention spans.
[Unknown]: New episodes out every Wednesday on IVM podcast app or website or any podcast app or site
[Unknown]: that you happen to prefer.
[Unknown]: End of story.
[Unknown]: May you live happily ever after.